## Introduction {.page_break_before}

### General Background

On January 21, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) released its first report concerning what is now known as the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200121-sitrep-1-2019-ncov.pdf].
This infectious disease came to international attention on December 31, 2019 following an announcement by national officials in China about 44 cases of a respiratory infection of unknown cause.
The first known cases were located in Wuhan City within the Hubei province of China, but the disease spread rapidly beyond Wuhan within China and subsequently around the world.
At the time of the first situation report [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200121-sitrep-1-2019-ncov.pdf], 282 confirmed cases had been identified, primarily in China, but also 1-2 exported cases had been identified in several neighboring countries (Thailand, Japan, and the Republic of Korea).
One week later, 4593 confirmed cases had been identified, spanning not only Asia, but also Australia, North America, and Europe [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200128-sitrep-8-ncov-cleared.pdf].
On March 11, 2020, WHO formally classified the situation as a pandemic [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200311-sitrep-51-covid-19.pdf].
On April 4, 2020, the WHO reported that the global number of confirmed cases had surpassed one million [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200404-sitrep-75-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=99251b2b_4].

At this time, over 130,000 deaths had been reported due to COVID-19 worldwide (April 15, 2020).

[Note: Maybe add a graph here, update as new reports come out.]
[So this is where manubot is particularly useful. it could pull from a public database / data table.]

Some review articles on aspects of COVID-19 have already been published and may be of great usefulness.
These have included reviews on the disease epidemiology [@doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2020.02.008], immunological response [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.002], and pharmacological treatments [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.002].
However, research on these topics is proceeding so quickly that any static review is likely to quickly become dated.

In this review, we seek to consolidate information about the virus in the context of related viruses and to synthesize what is known about the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 and related diseases.
Further, we aim to amplify the true signal out of the vast noise produced by thousands of publications on the topic [@doi:10.1038/s42254-020-0175-7].
We will critique, sort and distill informative contents out of the overwhelming flood of information and help the larger scientific community to be better educated on this critical subject affecting all of us.
This is a real-time, collaborative effort that welcomes submissions from scientists worldwide.


### About Coronaviruses

#### Classification:

Coronaviruses (CoVs; order *Nidovirales*, family *Coronaviridae*, subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae*) are enveloped viruses with some of the largest viral RNA genomes and helical capsids with the solar corona-like appearance [@isbn:0781760607].
All viruses in the *Nidovirales* order are characterized by: 1) enveloped, non-segmented, positive-sense RNA genomes with a highly conserved genomic organization; 2) many non-structural genes by ribosomal shifting; 3) several unusual enzymatic activities encoded within the replicase-transcriptase polyprotein; and 4) 3' nested sub-genomic mRNAs [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1].
Coronaviruses are classified into four genera: alpha, beta, delta and gamma coronaviruses.
Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].
The viruses were initially subdivided into these genera based on antigenic relationships of the spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins but are now divided by phylogenetic clustering.

Most coronaviruses are considered zoonotic viruses with little to no transmission observed in humans.
A major group of coronaviruses include human coronaviruses (HCoVs) strains associated with multiple respiratory diseases of varying severity, ranging from common cold to severe pneumonia, with severe symptoms mostly observed in immunocompromised individuals [@doi:10.1086/377612].
Approximately one-third of common cold infections in humans is attributable to four out of six previously known human coronaviruses (HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1) that are globally circulating in the human population [@doi:10.1038/s41579-018-0118-9;@doi:10.3390/diseases4030026].
In the past two decades, however, highly pathogenic human coronaviruses have been identified, including the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 1 (SARS-CoV-1) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) although both infections were confined to specific geographic regions [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81;@doi:10.1038/s41579-018-0118-9].
The current pandemic of COVID-19, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), represents an acute and rapidly spreading global health crisis with symptoms for reported cases ranging from mild to severe or fatal [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html] and including outcomes such as acute respiratory distress, acute lung injury and other pulmonary complications.
The possibility of asymptomatic cases is also being investigated.
The transmission and mortality rate estimations of COVID-19 remain to be determined.

[this section may be better as a figure panel + legend]
Phylogenetic analysis of a PCR amplicon fragment from five patients along with the total virus genome of 29.8 kilobases indicates that the virus is a novel betacoronavirus belonging to the B lineage, also known as sarbecovirus.
The sarbecovirus lineage also includes the human SARS coronavirus [@doi:10/ggjs7j].


#### Virion, morphology, structure:
Coronavirus virions are spherical with diameters ranging between 100 to 160nm.
The virion has a lipid envelope with spike (S) glycoproteins on the surface creating a distinctive "crown" shape, for which the family of viruses was named [@isbn:0781760607].


#### Genome structure and replication:
Coronavirus genomes are single-stranded non-segmented positive RNA (ssRNA+) that are 27 to 32kb in length.
The SARS-CoV-2 genome lies in the middle of this range at 29,903 bp in length [@doi:10/ggjr43].
Coronavirus genomes are comprised of a replicase gene that is 2/3 of the genome and the remaining 1/3 that encodes structural proteins including: spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins.
There are additional accessory genes that are present depending on the strain.
The non-structural polypeptide is translated into 16 non-structural proteins (nsp1-16, except Gammacoronaviruses that do not contain nsp1), which form replication machinery to synthesize viral RNA [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25681].

Replication initiates with the binding of the virus to a host cell via the S protein.
The viral membrane fuses with the endosomal membrane to release the viral genome into the host cytoplasm.
The replicase gene is translated and assembled into the viral replicase complex, which can synthesize dsRNA genome from the genomic ssRNA(+).
The dsRNA genome is then transcribed and replicated to create viral mRNAs and new ssRNA(+) genomes [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1; @url:https://viralzone.expasy.org/30?outline=all_by_species].

#### Transmission
In general, respiratory viruses like coronavirus can have multiple routes of person-to-person transmission including droplet transmission (i.e. inhalation for cough, sneeze), aerosol transmission (i.e. virus suspended in air), and contact transmission (i.e. contact with oral, nasal, and eye mucous membranes).
Other modes of transmission, such as through touching surfaces or objects and then touching mucous membranes, can also be investigated.
While existing evidence is insufficient to conclude which mode of transmission different coronaviruses use [@doi:10.1038/s41368-020-0075-9], simulations [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa032867] and trace studies [@doi:10.3390/ijerph15122757] suggest that person-to-person transmission of coronaviruses is droplet based.
Other aspects of transmission to investigate are the relationship between infectiousness and virus shedding with disease period or symptoms and also the proportions of cases that are attributable to various types of transmission events, such as transmission between relatives, nosocomial transmissions, and other possible types of interactions.
Some information about these characteristics of transmission are available for the highly pathogenic coronaviruses SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV [@doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385885-6.00009-2; @doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
For SARS-CoV-2 it is still being investigated whether, in addition to being spread by people who show symptoms,  the virus can be transmitted by people who do not show symptoms [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-spreads.html], such as during the pre-symptomatic stage of infection or in people with asymptomatic infections (a presentation which sometimes occurs in other infectious diseases but is still being investigated for SARS-CoV-2).

### SARS-CoV-2: Origin, Phylogenetics, and Evolution

#### Origin of SARS-CoV-2
The evolutionary origins of the SARS-CoV-2 virus are not yet fully understood.
Genomic analyses and comparisons to other known coronaviruses suggest that SARS-CoV-2 is unlikely to have originated in a laboratory -- either purposely engineered and released, or escaped -- and instead evolved naturally in an animal host [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0820-9].

Among known coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has the closest overall sequence similarity to RaTG13 (~96%) found in a *Rhinolophus affinis* bat [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7], while the receptor binding domain (RBD) is highly similar to that of viruses found in pangolins [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.19.950253].
This suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may have originated in viral reservoirs of similar hosts; however, current evidence cannot discriminate an origin of the virus before or after zoonotic transfer to humans [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0820-9].

### COVID-19: Mechanisms and Presentation

#### Immunological Mechanisms of Coronavirus-driven Disease in Humans

Coronaviruses are known to cause respiratory illnesses in humans through the following possible mechanisms...[Summarize relevant mechanisms for cell entry & address evidence for/against ACE2 being important, etc.]

#### Clinical Presentation of COVID-19

Retrospective samples of COVID-19 patients described the clinical presentations of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 which included lower respiratory tract infection with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
[@doi:10/ggnxb3] noted that upper respiratory tract symptoms were less common, which suggests that the virus targets cells located in the lower respiratory tract.
The symptoms of infection by SARS-CoV-2 can vary greatly, making it difficult for public health agencies to provide clear recommendations for citizens regarding what symptoms indicate infection and should prompt isolation.
[@doi:10/ggnxb3] found that a higher probability of mortality was associated with older age and higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment scores, as well as high levels of d-dimer.
Mortality might be associated with other biomarkers measured in blood samples including lactate dehydrogenase and cardiac troponin I, although these analyses may not have been appropriately corrected for multiple testing.
They also found that survivors continued to shed the virus for a median of 20 days and a maximum of at least 37 days.

#### Molecular Mechanisms of COVID-19

- How can we evaluate the human response to SARS-CoV-2 on a molecular level?
- What can omics technologies tell us about changes in the body following SARS-CoV-2 infection?

SARS-CoV-2 is a novel human coronavirus, following SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV to become the third coronavirus causing severe pneumonia in humans to emerge in the 21st century [@doi:10.1016/bs.aivir.2018.01.001]. 
Therefore, most of our current knowledge of the molecular mechanisms through which SARS-CoV-2 infects cells is obtained from studies on previously identified coronaviruses. 
The entry of a coronavirus into a target cell is mediated by the binding of the viral spike (S) protein to a specific cellular receptor and the subsequent priming/cleavage of the S protein by cellular proteases [@doi:10/cf8chz; @doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104792]. 
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) and Transmembrane Serine Protease 2 (TMPRSS2) have been identified as a prime receptor and a critical protease, respectively, facilitating SARS-CoV/CoV-2 entry into a target cell [@doi:10.1038/nature02145; @doi:10.1126/science.abb2507; @doi:10.1128/JVI.01542-10; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052; @doi:10.1128/JVI.02232-10]. 
This finding has led to a hypothesized role for ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression in determining which cells, tissues and organs are most likely to be infected by SARS-CoV-2.

Recent clinical investigations of COVID-19 patients have detected SARS-CoV-2 transcripts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (93% of specimens), sputum (72%), nasal swabs (63%), fibrobronchoscopy brush biopsies (46%), pharyngeal swabs (32%), feces (29%) and blood (1%) [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786]. 
Two studies reported that SARS-CoV-2 could not be detected in the urine specimens [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3204]; however, a third study identified four urine samples (out of 58) that were positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acids [@doi:10.1097/CM9.0000000000000774]. 
Respiratory failure remains the leading cause of death for COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1111/his.14134]. 
Besides major pulmonary damage, SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage many other organ systems including the heart [@doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.0950], kidney [@doi:10.1038/s41585-020-0319-7; @doi:10.1186/s13054-020-02872-z], liver [@doi:10/ggpx6s], and gastrointestinal tract [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055; @doi:10.1111/1751-2980.12851].
It can even cause neurological complications [@doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2020.03.031]. 
As it becomes clearer that SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage multiple organs, the scientific community is pursuing multiple avenues of investigation in order to build a consensus about how the virus affects the human body.
To quickly associate the clinical outcomes with SARS-CoV-2 infection, researchers are taking advantage of “omics” technologies to profile the expression of coronavirus entry factors across the tissues.



[Start with RNA-seq description and summarize studies so far including healthy and infected tissues/cells in vivo/in vitro]

### Approaches to Understanding COVID-19

Scientific characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and of the COVID-19 disease it causes is critical to controlling the current pandemic.
Several broad areas of research interact with each other, offering different pieces of information critical to understanding the virus and disease.
A comprehensive understanding of the epidemic must unify basic scientific and medical research with public health and biotechnology.

#### Science & Medicine

Understanding how the virus functions and interacts with the host is foundational to understanding pathogenesis and disease progression and to identifying available and novel approaches to treatment.
Therefore, the fields of virology, immunology, and molecular biology are fundamental to characterizing SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
These topics can be approached using a range of techniques, including characterization of the host response from the cellular to systems level.
Contextualizing SARS-CoV-2 in relation to other viruses that infect humans and other animals can further serve to elucidate the reaction of the human host to viral exposure.
This information, when combined with an understanding of the biology of pharmaceutical and medical interventions, can guide new approaches to treatment.

#### Public Health

One necessary component of determining how to manage the outbreak is to understand epidemiological factors related to the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
These can include characteristics such as when infected individuals are contagious, how the virus is transmitted between individuals, the range of symptoms associated with infection and/or contagiousness in different individuals, and how rapidly the virus propagates between individuals, etc.
The development of diagnostic tools is critical to this goal.
Accurate diagnoses on a large scale is necessary to collect the data needed to develop epidemiological models.
Other areas of public health that address resource availability, inequity, human behavior, and other components that influence people's exposure to pathogens and ability to manage illness will also be critical to mounting a global response to the pandemic.
Public health strategies to manage epidemics include anticipation and early detection of emerging diseases (aided by rapid development of diagnostics), containment (using strategies to test, trace and isolate such as widespread testing, contact tracing, quarantining and isolation), control and mitigation of spread (including social distancing), and elimination and eradication. 
An effective public health response requires response coordination, disease surveillance and intervention monitoring, risk communication and health education (including education about personal protective equipment and hand hygiene and containment of “infodemics” of false information), non-pharmaceutical measures to prevent and reduce transmission, and health interventions such as vaccines and other pharmaceuticals that can reduce transmission, curb morbidity and mortality, and mitigate the effects on health systems and other sectors of society [@url:https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/managing-epidemics-interactive.pdf].
Currently, this manuscript focuses primarily on contextualizing epidemiological characteristics such as reproduction number and dynamics of transmission that intersect with the fundamental biology of the virus or the development of therapeutic and diagnostic technologies.

#### Biotechnology

##### Diagnostics

Two major concerns within diagnosis include the detection of current infections in individuals with and without symptoms, and the detection of past exposure without an active infection.
In the latter category, identifying whether individuals can develop or have developed sustained immunity is also a major consideration.
The development of high-throughput, affordable methods for detecting active infections and sustained immunity will be critical to understanding and controlling the disease.

- What are approaches that allow us to detect current infection or past exposure for other viruses?
- What is sustained immunity and what are the indicators?

##### Therapeutics

The identification of interventions that can mitigate the effect of the virus on exposed and infected individuals is a significant research priority.
Some possible approaches include the identification of existing pharmaceuticals that reduce the severity of infection, either by reducing the virus' virulence (e.g., antivirals) or managing the most severe symptoms of infection.
Due to the long timeline for the development of novel pharmaceuticals, in most cases, research surrounding possible pharmaceutical interventions focuses on the identification and investigation of existing compounds whose mechanisms may be relevant to COVID-19.
Other foci of current research include the identification of antibodies produced by survivors of COVID-19 and the development of vaccines.
Understanding the mechanisms describing host-virus interactions between humans and SARS-CoV-2 are thus critical to identifying candidate therapeutics.

### Summary
In this review, we seek to consolidate information about efforts to develop strategies for diagnosis and therapeutics as new information is released by the scientific community.
We include information from both traditional peer-reviewed scientific literature and from preprints, which typically have not undergone peer review but have been critically evaluated by the scientists involved in this effort.
The goal of this manuscript is to present preliminary findings within the broader context of COVID-19 research and to identify the broad interpretations of new research, as well as limitations to interpretability.
