## Transmission, Susceptibility, and Presentation

### Mechanism of Transmission

<!-- TODO See https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/issues/609 -->
<!-- Section has not been updated except to define relationship to pathogenesis-->
In general, respiratory viruses like coronavirus can have multiple routes of person-to-person transmission including droplet transmission (i.e. inhalation for cough, sneeze), aerosol transmission (i.e. virus suspended in air), and contact transmission (i.e. contact with oral, nasal, and eye mucous membranes).
These biological sources are considered to hold particular risk due to the pathogenesis of the virus (see below).
Other modes of transmission, such as through touching surfaces or objects and then touching mucous membranes, can also be investigated.
While droplet-based and contact were initially considered to be the primary modes of SARS-CoV-2 transmission [@doi:10.1038/s41368-020-0075-9], as additional information has emerged, the possibility of aerosol transmission has also been raised [@doi:10.1126/science.abc6197; @doi:10.1056/NEJMc2004973; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa939].
Other aspects of transmission to investigate are the relationship between infectiousness and virus shedding with disease period or symptoms and also the proportions of cases that are attributable to various types of transmission events, such as transmission between relatives, nosocomial transmissions, and other possible types of interactions.
Some information about these characteristics of transmission are available for the highly pathogenic coronaviruses SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV [@doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385885-6.00009-2; @doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
For SARS-CoV-2 it is still being investigated whether, in addition to being spread by people who show symptoms,  the virus can be transmitted by people who do not show symptoms [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-spreads.html], such as during the pre-symptomatic stage of infection or in people with asymptomatic infections.
The current pandemic of COVID-19, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), represents an acute global health crisis with symptoms for reported cases ranging from mild to severe or fatal [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html] and including outcomes such as acute respiratory distress, acute lung injury and other pulmonary complications.
The possibility of asymptomatic cases is also being investigated.
The transmission and mortality rate estimations of COVID-19 are likely dynamic based on both public health and medical interventions.
<!-- I think there are better estimates now (about 50% asymptomatic I think, once you take out the presymptomatic).-->
<!-- Most credible IFR estimates I've seen are between 0.5-1.5%, depending on the population. CFRs will be greater and vary a lot.-->

### Dynamics of Transmission

Disease spread dynamics can be estimated using R~0~, the basic reproduction number, and R~t~, the effective reproduction number.
Thus, accurate estimates are crucial to understanding the dynamics of infection and to predict the effects of different interventions.
R~0~ and the timescale of infection (measured by the infectious period and the exposed period) govern population-level epidemic dynamics, with R~0~ being one of the most important epidemiological parameters [@isbn:9780691116174].
R~0~ is the average number of new (secondary) infections caused by one infected person, assuming a wholly susceptible population [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9574.1996.tb01482.x].
A simple mechanistic model used to describe infectious disease dynamics is a susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) compartmental model.
In this formulation individuals move through three states: susceptible, infected, and recovered; two parameters, $\gamma$ and $\beta$, specify the rate at which the infectious recover, and the infection transmission rate, respectively.
In this simple formulation, R~0~ is estimated as the ratio of $\beta$ and $\gamma$.[@doi:10.1126/science.abb5659; @isbn:9780691116174].
A pathogen can invade a susceptible population only if R~0~ > 1 [@isbn:9780691116174; @isbn:9780199209996].
The spread of an infectious disease at a particular time t can be quantified by R~t~, the effective reproduction number, which assumes that part of the population has already recovered (and thus gained immunity to reinfection) or that mitigating interventions were put into place.
For example, if only a fraction S~t~ of the population is still susceptible, R~t~ = S~t~ x R~0~.
When R~t~ is greater than 1, an epidemic grows (i.e., the proportion of the population that is infectious increases); when R~t~ is less than 1, the proportion of the population that is infectious decreases.
R~0~ and R~t~ can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using mathematical modeling.
Modeling approaches are typically based upon a classic epidemiological model structure: the SIR model and its extensions [@https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1927.0118; @doi:10.1038/280361a0].
In the context of SARS-CoV-2, more complex modified susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) models are commonly used.[need citations]

Estimates of R~0~ for COVID-19 lie in the range R~0~=1.4-6.5 [@doi:10/ggjvr7; @doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3221].
Variation in R~0~ is expected between different populations and the estimated values of R~0~ discussed below are for specific populations in specific environments.
The different estimates of R~0~ should not necessarily be interpreted as a range of estimates of the same underlying parameter.

<!--I am not quite sure about this next paragraph. Most sophisticated models now incorporate "data" in their SEIR formulation, so I'm not sure it's accurate to draw the distinction.-->

In one study of international cases, the predicted value is R~0~=1.7 [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040329], in China (both Hubei province and nationwide), the value is predicted to lie in the range R~0~=2.0-3.6 [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3524675; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.25.919787; @doi:10/ggjvr7], and on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred, predicted R~0~=2.28 [@doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.033].
SEIR model-derived estimates of R~0~ range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549] to R~0~=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915].
Using the same model as for the French population, a study estimated R~0~=2.6 in South Korea [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915], which is consistent with other studies [@tag:Park2020_distancing].
From a meta-analysis of studies estimating R~0~, [@doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021] predict the median as R~0~=2.79.

Inference of the effective reproduction number can provide insight into how populations respond to an infection, and the effectiveness of interventions.
In China, R~t~ was predicted to lie in the range 1.6-2.6 in Jan 2020, before travel restrictions [@doi:10/ggptcf].
R~t~ decreased from 2.35 one week before travel restrictions were imposed (Jan 23, 2020), to 1.05 one week after.
Using their model, the authors also estimate the probability of new outbreaks occurring: the probability of a single individual exporting virus causing a large outbreak is 17-25% assuming MERS-like or SARS-like transmission, and the probability of a large outbreak occurring after ≥4 infections exist at a new location is greater than 50%.
An independent study came to similar conclusions: in a two-week period before Jan 23 finding R~t~=2.38, and decreasing to R~t~ = 1.34 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 3) or R~t~=0.98 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 8) [@doi:10.1126/science.abb3221].
In South Korea, R~t~ was inferred for Feb-Mar 2020 in two cities: Daegu (the center of the outbreak), and Seoul [@tag:Park2020_distancing].
Metro data was also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing measures.
R~t~ decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing measures were introduced.
In Seoul, R~t~ decreased slightly, but remained close to 1 (and larger than R~t~ in Daegu).
This highlights that social distancing measures appeared to work to contain the infection in Daegu, but that in Seoul, R~t~ remains above 1, thus secondary outbreaks are possible.
It also shows the importance of region-specific analysis: the large decline in case load nationwide is mainly due to the Daegu region, and could hide persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do.
In Iran, estimates of R~t~ declined from 4.86 in the first week to 2.1 by the fourth week after the first cases were reported [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422].
In Europe, analysis of 11 countries inferred the dynamics of R~t~ over a time range from the beginning of the outbreak until March 28, 2020, by which point most countries had implemented major interventions (such as school closures, public gathering bans, and stay-at-home orders) [@doi:10.25561/77731].
Across all countries, the mean R~t~ before interventions began was estimated as 3.87; R~t~ varied considerably, from below 3 in Norway to above 4.5 in Spain.
After interventions, R~t~ decreased by an average of 64% across all countries, with mean R~t~=1.43.
The lowest predicted value was 0.97 for Norway and the highest was 2.64 for Sweden, which may be in part because Sweden did not implement social distancing measures on the same scale as other countries.
The study concludes that while large changes in R~t~ are observed, it is too early to tell whether the interventions put into place are sufficient to decrease R~t~ below 1.

More generally, population-level epidemic dynamics can be both observed and modelled [@doi:10.1126/science.abb5659].
Data and empirically determined biological mechanisms inform models, while models can be used to try to understand data and systems of interest or to make predictions about possible future dynamics, such as the estimation of capacity needs [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2004064117] or the comparison of predicted outcomes among prevention and control strategies [@doi:10/ggp3xq; @doi:10.1073/pnas.2004978117].
Many current efforts to model R~t~ have led to tools that assist the visualization of estimates in real time or over recent intervals [@url:https://epiforecasts.io/covid; @url:https://rt.live].
While these may be valuable resources, it is important to note that the estimates arise from models containing many assumptions and are dependent on the quality of the data they use, which varies widely by region.

### Factors Influencing Susceptibility

<!-- TODO: I think this section could use a revisiting. I think we should deal with the male sex and older age portion in an initial paragraph. After that, it looks like the racial burdens are likely to be attributable in large part to systemic racism - incarceration, wage discrimination, housing discrimination, and more - both now and in the past. Right now this jumps around b/w groups and presents discrimination as the basis in disparities as a possibility but not necessarily a likely contributor. I also worry that it makes many of these things research questions, even though one of the resources we cite ( 10.1093/tbm/ibaa055 ) includes policy recommendations. In short, it feels like we list a bunch of proximal causes but don't tie things back to the overarching likely cause. Finally, the way genetic factors are brought up makes me worry that someone might have, as a takeaway, that genetics may play a driving role in disparities at this level. Discussed in https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/issues/610 -->

In the context of the United States, persons diagnosed with COVID-19 are more likely to require hospitalization if they are of male sex, of older age, and/or of Black/African American background [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598; @doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6925e1].
African Americans have also been reported to have disproportionate risk of kidney complications from COVID-19 [@doi:10.1016/j.kint.2020.05.006].
In addition to African Americans, disproportionate harm and mortality from COVID-19 has also been noted in Latino/Hispanic communities and in Native American / Alaskan Native communities such as the Navajo nation [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8598; @doi:10.1136/bmj.m1483; @doi:10.1111/jrh.12451; https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/09/us/coronavirus-navajo-nation.html?searchResultPosition=10; @url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/05/us/coronavirus-latinos-african-americans-cdc-data.html; @doi:10.1093/tbm/ibaa055].
In Brazil, where the pandemic has also been severe, indigenous communities are likewise at special risk [@doi:10.1126/science.abc0073].
The sizable racial disparities observed may be due to a number of factors, including different levels of pre-existing co-morbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes or lung diseases.
They may also be influenced by the disproportionate socioeconomic burdens placed on many people of color, which can correspond to greater economic difficulties, more hazardous or crowded work or living conditions, or reduced access to health care [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598; @doi:10.1016/j.kint.2020.05.006; @doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.12403].
This might cause infections to be less likely to be diagnosed unless or until they were very severe; in the sample studied by [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598], African Americans were more likely to be diagnosed in hospital, while other groups were more likely to have been diagnosed in ambulatory settings in the community.
More research is needed for analyzing and remediating these disparities [@doi:10.1093/tbm/ibaa055].

People living in certain locations may be especially vulnerable to harm.
In a preprint, [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502] provided observational evidence that geographical areas in the United States that suffer from worse air pollution by fine particulate matter have also suffered more COVID-19 deaths per capita, after adjusting for demographic covariates.
Although lack of individual-level exposure data and the impossibility of randomization make it difficult to elucidate the exact causal mechanism, this finding would be consistent with similar findings for all-cause mortality (e.g., [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1803222115]).
Individuals in nursing homes / skilled nursing facilities [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.11642] and in some prisons and detention centers [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528] have also been exposed to higher risk of infection.
Certain occupations, such as health care work, can put individuals at increased risk [@doi:10.1002/ajim.23145; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0232452; @url:https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/causesofdeath/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19relateddeathsbyoccupationenglandandwales/deathsregistereduptoandincluding20april2020; @url:https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/whichoccupationshavethehighestpotentialexposuretothecoronaviruscovid19/2020-05-11;
@url:https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/disparities_review.pdf].

Many other factors influence risk of serious COVID-19 outcomes.
Genetic factors may play a role in risk of respiratory failure for COVID-19 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2020283; @doi:10.1093/gerona/glaa131; @doi:10.1101/2020.06.16.155101].
Diabetes may increase the risk of lengthy hospitalization [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2020.04.021] or of death [@doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2020.04.021;@doi:10.1007/s00592-020-01546-0].
[@doi:10.1111/dom.14057] and [@doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00124.2020] discuss possible ways in which COVID-19 and diabetes may interact.
Obesity also appears to be associated with higher risk of severe outcomes from SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2020.154262; @doi:10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042].
Obesity is considered an underlying risk factor for other health problems, and the mechanism for its contributions to COVID-19 hospitalization or mortality is not yet clear [@doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.06.005].

Studies of disparities and differences among groups in rates of hospitalization or death from COVID-19 are complicated by the fact that risk may be elevated in multiple ways.
An individual may be more likely to be exposed to the virus, more likely to get infected once exposed, more likely to have serious complications once infected, be less likely to get adequate help once they are seriously ill.
Although these are difficult to disaggregate, they suggest different possible interventions and each deserves consideration.
The epidemiological characteristics and clinical presentation of COVID-19 may differ somewhat in different areas of the world, presumably due to differential reporting, different age structures, and/or different risk factors [@doi:10.1007/s00592-020-01546-0].
Furthermore, because different subpopulations may have somewhat different vulnerabilities, needs, and resources, we recommend that researchers publishing studies on diagnostics and therapeutics take extra care to be clear about the demographic and medical characteristics of their sample, in order to facilitate discussions of the degree to which results may generalize or differ in other settings.

Several studies on disparities in COVID-19 have compared groups in terms of their probability of a severe outcome (like hospitalization or death) given that a person is diagnosed.
Early in the pandemic, it is more difficult to study or identify the larger population of all exposed or all infected people because of the existence of undetected infections; over the course of the pandemic, indirect estimates of infection rates through modeling improve and more direct estimates through a combination of serological tests, sampling methods and statistical methods have been made possible through biotechnology developments.
In contrast, [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2521-4] were able to compare overall rates of death from COVID-19, not simply in the subsample of diagnosed individuals, thus combining the probability of infection with the probability of death given infection. <!-- TODO: In contrast with what? -->
This was done using a dataset of 17 million adults in the United Kingdom.
In this administrative dataset, [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2521-4] found that male sex, older age, economic deprivation, nonwhite ethnicity (principally Black or South Asian), obesity, diabetes,  asthma, and several other comorbid conditions were associated with a higher risk of death from COVID-19.
They cautioned that despite the large sample size, their observational data did not directly provide information on the causal mechanisms which led to these statistical associations.
However, the ethnic and economic disparities did not vanish when adjusting for observed preexisting conditions.
[@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2521-4] also found that the predictive value of socioeconomic status seemed to increase over time, perhaps because many higher-paid workers were able to transition to working online.

Besides the direct harms caused by infection, many populations are in indirect risk of serious harm due to the social and economic effects of the pandemic and of the efforts needed to fight it.
These might include individuals with substance use disorder [@doi:10.7326/M20-1141], victims of natural disasters [@doi:10.1038/s41558-020-0804-2], and victims of human trafficking [@doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100409].
The pandemic could also delay the fight against other major infectious diseases, such as HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, potentially leading to a further increase of mortality [@doi:10.25561/78670].
Although they are beyond the scope of this paper, further research is needed in order to prevent these harms. <!-- there are already some policy recommendations in literature that we cite - we should probably direct folks there. I think we probably want a stronger synthesis and closing than this -->

