## Identification and Development of Prophylactics and Therapeutics for COVID-19 

### Abstract

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and went on to significantly impact most countries worldwide.
Only a small number of coronaviruses are known to infect humans, and only two are associated with the severe outcomes associated with SARS-CoV-2: SARS-CoV-1, a sister species that emerged in 2002, and MERS-CoV, which emerged in 2012.
Although both of these previous pandemics were rapidly controlled, no vaccines or robust therapeutic interventions were identified.
However, previous insights into the immune response to coronaviruses, many made in the context of better understanding SARS and MERS, have been beneficial in identifying approaches to the treatment and prophylaxis of COVID-19.
A number of potential therapeutics were rapidly identified, leading to a large number of clinical trials investigating a variety of possible therapeutic approaches being initiated early on in the pandemic.
Similarly, previous advances in vaccine development allowed for the rapid design and testing of candidate prophylactics.
As a result, by the end of 2020, a small number of therapeutics and vaccines have been authorized by regulatory agencies such as the Food and Drugs Administration in the United States, and many more continue to be under investigation.
Here, we describe a range of approaches for the treatment and prevention of COVID-19 along with their proposed mechanisms of action and the current status of clinical investigation into each candidate.
The status of these investigations will continue to evolve, and this review will be updated as progress is made.

### Importance 

The COVID-19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving crisis.
When the worldwide scientific community shifted its focus onto the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease it causes, a large number of possible pharmaceutical approaches for treatment and prevention were proposed.
What is known about each of these potential interventions has evolved rapidly throughout 2020.
In March 2020, we began monitoring a range of candidates and have continued to update this manuscript as new information became available throughout 2020.
Some have been supported, others have been revealed to be unlikely to have any therapeutic benefits, and most require more data before a conclusion can be drawn.
This rapidly changing area of research provides important insight into how the ongoing pandemic can be managed and also demonstrates the power of interdisciplinary collaboration to rapidly understand a virus and match its characteristics with existing or novel pharmaceuticals.

### Introduction

The novel coronavirus _Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2_ (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in late 2019 and quickly precipitated the worldwide spread of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the disease caused by its infection.
COVID-19 is associated with symptoms ranging from none (asymptomatic) to mild to severe, with approximately 2% of patients dying from COVID-19-related complicates such as acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS) [cite pathogenesis/transmission].
The virus is likely spread between people primarily by droplets, with the role of contact and aerosol transmission still in question [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12458; @doi:10/gg6br7].
As a result, public health guidelines have been critical to efforts to control the spread of the virus.
However, as of December 2020, COVID-19 remains a significant worldwide concern (Figure @fig:csse-deaths), with cases in some places surging far above the numbers reported in early 2020.
Due to the continued threat of the virus and the severity of the disease, the identification and development of prophylactic and therapeutic interventions have emerged as significant international priorities.
Both approaches hold valuable potential for controlling the impact of the disease.
Prophylactics induce immunity to prevent an individual from contracting a disease whereas therapeutics treat a disease in individuals who have already been infected.
For a highly infectious virus like SARS-CoV-2, a vaccine would hold particular value because it could bolster the immune response to the virus of the population broadly, thereby driving a lower rate of infection and likely significantly reducing fatalities.
However, the vaccine development process has historically been slow, and vaccines fail to provide immediate prophylactic protection or treat ongoing infections [@doi:10.3390/v10120680].
Thus, there is also an immediate need for treatments that palliate symptoms and prevent the most severe outcomes from infection.
Fortunately, prior developments during other recent pandemics, especially those caused by human coronaviruses (HCoV), has provided a number of hypotheses guiding a biomedical approach to the novel coronavirus infection.

<!--Possibly swap deaths for cases and compare to SARS cases, then down to Prior HCoV section?-->
{{csse_deaths}} COVID-19 deaths had been reported worldwide as of {{csse_date_pretty}} (Figure @fig:csse-deaths).

![
**Cumulative global COVID-19 deaths since January 22, 2020.**
Data are from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University [@https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/tree/master/csse_covid_19_data/csse_covid_19_time_series].
]({{csse_deaths_figure}} "Global COVID-19 deaths"){#fig:csse-deaths secno=1}

#### Lessons from Prior HCoV Outbreaks

SARS-CoV-2's rapid shift from an unknown virus to a significant worldwide threat closely parallels the emergence of _Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus_ (SARS-CoV-1).
The first documented case of COVID-19 was reported in Wuhan, China in November 2019, and the disease quickly spread worldwide during the early months of 2020.
Similarly, the first case of SARS was reported in November 2002 in the Guangdong Province of China and spread within China and then into several countries across continents over the following months [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029; @doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
In fact, the virus causing COVID-19 was quickly identified through genome sequencing as a novel betacoronavirus closely related to SARS-CoV-1 @doi:10.46234/ccdcw2020.017].
There are other similarities but also some differences in characteristics of the two viruses relevant to their spread.
SARS infection is severe, with an estimated death rate of 9.5% [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029], while estimates of the death rate associated with COVID-19 are much lower, at approximately 2% [cite pathogenesis/transmission section] .
SARS-CoV-1 is highly contagious via droplet transmission and has a basic reproduction number (R~0~) of 4 (i.e., each person infected was estimated to infect four other people) [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029].
SARS-CoV-2 also appears to be spread primarily by droplet transmission [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12458; @doi:10/gg6br7], and most estimates of its R~0~ fall between 2.5 and 3 [cite transmission/pathogenesis].
Furthermore, the 17-year difference in the timing of these two outbreaks has led to some major differences in the tools available for the international community's response.
At the time that SARS-CoV-1 emerged, no new HCoV had been identified in almost 40 years [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
The identity of the virus underlying the SARS disease remained unknown until April of 2003, when the SARS-CoV-1 virus was characterized through a worldwide scientific effort spearheaded by the WHO [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
In contrast, the SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequence was released on January 3, 2020 [@doi:10.46234/ccdcw2020.017], only days after the international community became aware of the novel pneumonia-like illness now known as COVID-19.
While SARS-CoV-1 belonged to a distinct lineage from the two other HCoV known at the time of its discovery [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029], SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to SARS-CoV-1 and a more distant relative of another HCoV characterized in 2012, _Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus_ [@doi:10/ggjr43; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1211721].
Thus, despite their phylogenetic similarity, the viruses have different characteristics relevant to their spread, and the SARS-CoV-2 virus emerged under very different circumstances than SARS-CoV-1 in terms of scientific knowledge about HCoV.

The trajectories of the pandemics associated with each of the viruses have also diverged significantly.
By July 2003, the SARS outbreak was officially determined to be under control, with the success credited to infection management practices such as mask wearing [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
In contrast, MERS is still circulating and remains a concern because the fatality rate is very high at almost 35%, but the disease is much less easily transmitted, with an R~0~ of 1 [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029].
The low R~0~ in combination with public health practices allowed for its spread to be contained [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029].
Neither of these trajectories are comparable to that of SARS-CoV-2, which remains a serious threat worldwide a full year after the first known cases of COVID-19.
However, early results suggest that pharmaceutical interventions for COVID-19 may be more successful than previous efforts to develop prophylactics and therapeutics for SARS and MERS.
Vaccines were not used to control either virus, although vaccine development programs were established for SARS-CoV-1 [@doi:10.3390/v11010059].
Care for SARS and MERS patients prioritized supportive care and symptom management [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029].
To the extent that clinical treatments for SARS and MERS were explored, there is generally a lack of evidence supporting their efficacy.
For example, Ribavirin is an antiviral that was often used in combination with corticosteroids and sometimes interferon (IFN) medications to treat SARS and MERS [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81], but its effects have been found to be inconclusive in retrospective and _in vitro_ analyses of  SARS and the SARS-CoV-1 virus, respectively [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
IFNs and Ribavirin have shown promise in _in vitro_ analyses of MERS, but their clinical effectiveness remains unknown [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
Therefore, only limited pharmaceutical advances from prior HCoV outbreaks can be adopted to COVID-19.
Importantly, though, prior analyses of the virological and pathogenic properties of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV provide a strong foundation for the development of hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 that have served to accelerated the development and identification of potential prophylactic and therapeutic approaches.

#### Therapeutic Approaches

Therapeutic approaches to the current pandemic can utilize two potential avenues: they can reduce the symptoms that are harmful to COVID-19 patients, or they can directly target the virus to hinder the spread of infection.
The goal of the former is to reduce the severity and risks of an active infection while for the latter, it is to inhibit the development of the virus once an individual is infected.
A variety of symptom profiles with a range of severity are associated with COVID-19, many of which are not life-threatening.
A study of COVID-19 patients in a hospital in Berlin, Germany found that the symptoms associated with the highest risk of death included infection-related symptoms, such as sepsis, respiratory symptoms such as ARDS, and cardiovascular failure or pulmonary embolism [@doi:10.1101/2020.06.15.20131540].
Therefore, therapeutics that reduce risk associated with these severe outcomes are of particular interest to reducing the pandemic death toll.
Therapeutics that directly target the virus itself typically fall into the broad category of antivirals.
Antiviral therapies hinder the spread of a virus within the host, rather than destroying existing copies of the virus, and these drugs can vary in their specificity to a narrow or broad range of viral targets.
For both categories, uncertainty often surrounds treatments' exact mechanisms of action, as most therapies have secondary or off-target effects.

In this review, we describe some treatments and prophylactics that have been considered for COVID-19 and classify them according to their biological properties, specifically whether they are biologics (produced from components of organisms) or small molecules.
Small molecule drugs include drugs targeted at viral particles, drugs targeted at host proteins, and broad spectrum pharmaceuticals, while biologics include antibodies, interferons, and vaccines.
A large number of clinical trials investigating a wide range of possible therapeutics and prophylactics for COVID-19 are currently in progress or have already been completed (Figure @fig:ebm-trials).
The purpose of this review is to critically appraise the literature surrounding a subset of clinical trials and to evaluate a range of approaches to repurpose existing or develop novel approaches to the prevention, mitigation, and treatment of coronavirus infections.
The identity of the virus underlying the SARS disease remained unknown until April of 2003, when the SARS-CoV-1 virus was characterized through a worldwide scientific effort spearheaded by the WHO [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
In contrast, the SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequence was released on January 3, 2020 [@doi:10.46234/ccdcw2020.017], only days after the international community became aware of the novel pneumonia-like illness now known as COVID-19.
While SARS-CoV-1 belonged to a distinct lineage from the two other HCoV known at the time of its discovery [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029], SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to SARS-CoV-1 and a more distant relative of another HCoV characterized in 2012, _Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus_ [@doi:10/ggjr43; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1211721].
Thus, despite their phylogenetic similarity, the viruses have different characteristics relevant to their spread, and the SARS-CoV-2 virus emerged under very different circumstances than SARS-CoV-1 in terms of scientific knowledge about HCoV.

![
**COVID-19 clinical trials.**
There are {{ebm_trials}} COVID-19 clinical trials and {{ebm_trials_results}} trials with results as of {{ebm_date_pretty}}.
The recruitment statuses and trial phases are shown only for trials in which the status or phase is recorded.
The study types include only types used in at least five trials.
The common interventions are all interventions used in at least ten trials.
Combinations of interventions, such as Hydroxychloroquine + Azithromycin, are tallied separately from the individual interventions.
Trials data are from the University of Oxford Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab's COVID-19 TrialsTracker [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3732709].
]({{ebm_trials_figure}} "COVID-19 clinical trials"){#fig:ebm-trials secno=1}

### Small Molecule Drugs

Small molecules are synthesized compounds of low molecular weight, typically less than 1 kilodalton (kDa) [@url:https://www.nuventra.com/resources/blog/small-molecules-versus-biologics/].
Small-molecule pharmaceutical agents have been a backbone of drug development since the discovery of penicillin in the early twentieth century [@doi:10.1126/science.287.5460.1960].
It and other antibiotics have long been among the best known applications of small molecules to therapeutics, but biotechnological developments such as the prediction of protein-protein interactions have facilitated advances in precise targeting of specific structures using small molecules [@doi:10.1126/science.287.5460.1960].
Small molecule drugs today encompass a wide range of therapeutics beyond antibiotics, including antivirals, protein inhibitors, and many broad-spectrum pharmaceuticals.

#### Small Molecule Antivirals

Antiviral drugs against SARS-CoV-2 are designed to inhibit replication of a virus within an epithelial host cell.
This process requires inhibiting the replication cycle of a virus by disrupting one of six fundamental steps [@isbn:978-1405136457].
In the first step, the virus attaches to the host cell, which it next penetrates through endocytosis.
Then the virus undergoes uncoating, which is classically defined as the release of viral contents into the host cell, and next the viral genetic material enters the nucleus where it gets replicated during the biosynthesis stage.
During the assembly stage, viral proteins are translated, allowing new viral particles to be assembled, and during the final step, release, the new viruses are released into the extracellular environment.
Many antiviral drugs are designed to inhibit the replication of viral genetic material during the biosynthesis step.
Unlike DNA viruses, which can use the host enzymes to propagate themselves, RNA viruses like SARS-CoV-2 depend on their own polymerase, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), for replication [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7; @doi:10.1002/jmv.25761].
Targeting RdRP is therefore an effective strategy for antivirals against RNA viruses and is the proposed mechanism underlying the treatment of SARS and MERS with Ribavirin [@doi:10.1080/17460441.2019.1581171].
However, although antivirals are designed to target a virus, they can also impact other processes in the host and may have unintended effects.

##### Nucleoside and Nucleotide Analogs

###### Favipiravir

Favipiravir (Avigan), also known as T-705, was discovered by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. [@url:https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB12466].
The drug was found to be effective at blocking viral amplification in several influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses, such as _Flaviviridae_ and _Picornaviridae_, through a reduction in plaque formation [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002] and viral replication in Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells [@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06].
Furthermore, inoculation of mice with favipiravir was shown to increase survival of influenza infections [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06].
In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan for the treatment of patients infected with influenza that was resistant to conventional treatments like neuraminidase inhibitors [@doi:10.2183/pjab.93.027].
Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA polymerase in a dose-dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including Influenza virus [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01074-08; @doi:10.1128/AAC.00356-07; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].
Nucleotides and nucleosides are the natural building blocks for RNA synthesis.
Because of this, modifications to nucleotides and nucleosides can disrupt key processes including replication [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.04.004].
Biochemical experiments showed that favipiravir was recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template.
A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].
Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced with the addition of favipiravir in early times post-infection [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].

The effectiveness of favipiravir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under investigation.
An open-label, nonrandomized, before-after controlled study was recently conducted [@doi:10.1016/j.eng.2020.03.007].
The study included 80 COVID-19 patients (35 treated with favipiravir, 45 control) from the isolation ward of the National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases (The Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China.
The patients in the control group were treated with other antivirals, such as lopinavir and ritonavir.
It should be noted that subsequent, large-scale analyses, the WHO Solidarity trial and the RECOVERY trial, identified no effect of lopinavir or of a lopinavir-ritonavir combination, respectively, on the metrics of COVID-19-related mortality that each assessed [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184; @doi:10/fnx2; @doi:10.1056/NEJMe2034294].
Treatment was applied on days 2-14; treatment stopped either when viral clearance was confirmed or at day 14.
The efficacy of the treatment was measured by 1) the time until viral clearance using Kaplan-Meier survival curves, and 2) the improvement rate of chest computed tomography (CT) scans on day 14 after treatment.
The study found that favipiravir increased the speed of recovery, measured as viral clearance from the patient by RT-PCR, with patients receiving favipiravir recovering in  4 days compared to 11 days for patients receiving antivirals such as lopinavir and ritonavir.
Additionally, the lung CT scans of patients treated with favipiravir showed significantly higher improvement rates (91%) on day 14 compared to control patients (62%).
However, there were adverse side effects in 4 (11%) favipiravir-treated patients and 25 (56%) control patients.
The adverse side effects included diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash, and liver and kidney injury.
Overall, despite the study reporting clinical improvement in favipiravir-treated patients, due to some issues with study design, it cannot be determined whether treatment with favipiravir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of any treatment.
For example, despite the significant differences observed between the two treatment groups, follow-up analysis is necessary due to the small sample size.
The selection of patients did not take into consideration important factors such as previous clinical conditions or sex, and there was no age categorization.
The study was neither randomized nor blinded, and the baseline control group was another antiviral instead of a placebo.
Therefore, randomized controlled trials are still required.

###### Remdesivir

Remdesivir (GS-5734) is an intravenous antiviral that was developed by Gilead Sciences to treat Ebola Virus Disease (EVD).
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, it did not have any have any FDA-approved use.
However, on May 1, 2020, the FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/137564/download].
The EUA was based on information from two clinical trials, NCT04280705 and NCT04292899 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04292899; @clinicaltrials:NCT04280705; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007016].
Remdesivir is metabolized to GS-441524, an adenosine analog that inhibits a broad range of polymerases and then evades exonuclease repair, causing chain termination [@doi:10.1074/jbc.AC120.013056; @doi:10.1128/mBio.00221-18; @doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0].
A clinical trial in the Democratic Republic of Congo found some evidence of effectiveness against EVD, but two antibody preparations were found to be more effective, and remdesivir was not pursued [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1910993].
Although it was developed against EVD, remdesivir also inhibits polymerase and replication of the coronaviruses MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-1 in cell culture assays with submicromolar IC50s [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3653].
It has also been found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2, showing synergy with chloroquine _in vitro_ [@doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0].
The effectiveness of remdesivir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under investigation.

Remdesivir was first used on some COVID-19 patients under compassionate use guidelines [@doi:10.1126/science.abb7243, @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001191; @doi:10.1101/2020.03.09.20032896].
All were in late stages of COVID-19 infection, and these reports were inconclusive about the drug's efficacy.
Gilead Sciences, the maker of remdesivir, led a recent publication that reported outcomes for compassionate use of the drug in 61 patients hospitalized with confirmed COVID-19.
Here, 200 mg of remdesivir was administered intravenously on day 1, followed by a further 100 mg/day for 9 days [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007016].
There were significant issues with the study design, or lack thereof.
There was no randomized control group.
The inclusion criteria were variable: some patients only required low doses of oxygen, while others required ventilation.
The study included many sites, potentially with variable inclusion criteria and treatment protocols.
The patients analyzed had mixed demographics.
There was a short follow-up period of investigation.
Some patients worsened, some patients died, and eight were excluded from the analysis mainly due to missing post-baseline information; thus, their health is unaccounted for.
Therefore, even though the study reported clinical improvement in 68% of the 53 patients ultimately evaluated, due to the significant issues with study design, it could not be determined whether treatment with remdesivir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of treatment.
Another study comparing 5- and 10-day treatment regimens reported similar results but was also limited because of the lack of a placebo control [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015301].
The study did not alter our understanding of the efficacy of remdesivir in treating COVID-19, but the encouraging results provided motivation for placebo-controlled studies.

Remdesivir was later tested in a double-blind placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trial performed at 60 trial sites, 45 of which were in the United states [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764; @clinicaltrials:NCT04280705].
The trial recruited 1,062 patients and randomly assigned them to placebo treatment or treatment with remdesivir.
Patients were stratified for randomization based on site and the severity of disease presentation at baseline [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764].
The treatment was 200 mg on day 1, followed by 100 mg on days 2 through 10.
Data was analyzed from a total of 1,059 patients who completed the 29 day course of the trial (517 assigned to remdesivir and 508 to placebo) [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764].
The two groups were well matched demographically and clinically at baseline.
Those who received remdesivir had a median recovery time of 10 days, as compared with 15 days in those who received placebo (rate ratio for recovery, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.12 to 1.49; _p_ < 0.001).
The Kaplan-Meier estimates of mortality by 14 days were 6.7% with remdesivir and 11.9% with placebo, with a hazard ratio (HR) for death of 0.55 and a 95% CI of 0.36 to 0.83, and at day 29, remdesivir corresponded to 11.4% and the placebo to 15.2% (HR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.52 to 1.03).
Serious adverse events were reported in 131 of the 532 patients who received remdesivir (24.6%) and in 163 of the 516 patients in the placebo group (31.6%).
This study also reported an association between remdesivir administration and both clinical improvement and a lack of progression to more invasive respiratory intervention in patients receiving non-invasive and invasive ventilation at randomization [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764].
Largely on the results of this trial, the FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients.
Clinical trials are currently underway to evaluate the use of remdesivir to treat COVID-19 patients at both early and late stages of infection and in combinations with other drugs (Figure @fig:ebm-trials).
These trials include [@doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0; @clinicaltrials:NCT04292730; @url:https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2020-000936-23/FR; @clinicaltrials:NCT04252664; @clinicaltrials:NCT04257656].
As of October 22, 2020, remdesivir received FDA approval based on three clinical trials [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-treatment-covid-19].

However, results suggesting no effect of remdesivir on survival were reported by the WHO Solidarity trial [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184].
This large-scale, open-label trial enrolled 11,330 adult in-patients at 405 hospitals in 30 countries around the world [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184].
Patients were randomized in equal proportions into four experimental and a control conditions, corresponding to four candidate treatments for COVID-19 and SOC, respectively; no placebo was administered.
The 2750 patients in the remdesivir group were administered 200 mg intravenously on the first day and 100 mg on each subsequent day until day 10 and assess for in-hospital death (primary endpoint), duration of hospitalization, and progression to mechanical ventilation.
There were also 2708 control patients who would have been eligible and able to receive remdesivir were they not assigned to the control group.
A total of 604 patients among these two cohorts deceased during initial hospitalization.
The rate ratio of death between these two groups was therefore not significant (_p_ = 0.50), suggesting that the administration of remdesivir did not affect survival.
The two secondary analyses similarly did not find any effect of remdesivir.
Additionally, the authors compared data from their study with data from three other studies of remdesivir (including [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764]) stratified by supplemental oxygen status.
The adjusted rate ratio for death based on this meta-analysis was 0.91.
These results thus do not support the previous findings that remdesivir reduced median recovery time and mortality risk in COVID-19 patients.

In response to the results of the Solidarity trial, Gilead, which manufactures remdesivir under the name Veklury^R, released a statement pointing to the fact that the Solidarity trial was not placebo-controlled or double-blind and at the time of the statement had not been peer reviewed [@url:https://www.gilead.com/news-and-press/company-statements/gilead-sciences-statement-on-the-solidarity-trial]; these sentiments have been echoed elsewhere [@doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa934].
Other critiques of this study have noted that antivirals are not typically targeted at patients with severe illness, and therefore remdesivir could be more beneficial for patients with mild rather than severe cases [@url:https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/10/very-very-bad-look-remdesivir-first-fda-approved-covid-19-drug; @doi:10.1056/NEJMe2034294].
However, the publication associated with the trial sponsored by Gilead did suggest an effect of remdesivir on patients with severe disease, identifying an 11 versus 18 day recovery period (rate ratio for recovery: 1.31, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.52), although the results of a significance test were not provided [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764].
Additionally, a smaller analysis comparing treatment with remdesivir to standard of care in patients with moderate COVID-19 reported a small effect size, corresponding to minimal differences between these groups at day 11 [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.16349].
Therefore, some of the findings from this trial do seem to contradict the findings of the Solidarity trial.
On the other hand, only 62% of patients in the Solidarity trial were randomized on the day of admission or one day afterwards [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184], and differences in disease progression may influence the effect of remdesivir [@doi:10.1056/NEJMe2034294], so there could be be additional confounding factors in one or both trials.
The broad international nature of the Solidarity clinical trial, which included countries with a wide range of economic profiles and a variety of healthcare systems, provides a much-needed global perspective in a pandemic [@doi:10.1056/NEJMe2034294].
Despite the findings of the Solidarity trial, remdesivir remains available for the treatment of COVID-19 in many places.
Follow-up studies are needed and in many cases are underway to further investigate remdesivir-related outcomes, with possibilities including combinations of remdesivir with other drugs such as baricitinib, which is an inhibitor of Janus kinase 1 and 2 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2031994].
Similarly, the extent to which the remdesivir dosing regimen could influence outcomes is still under consideration.
A randomized, open-label trial compared the effect of remdesivir on 397 patients with severe COVID-19 over 5 versus 10 days [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015301; @ClinicalTrials:NCT04292899].
Patients in the two groups were administered 200 mg of remdesivir intravenously on the first day, followed by 100 mg on the subsequent four or nine days, respectively.
The two groups differed significantly in their clinical status, with patients assigned to the 10-day group having more severe illness.
This study also differed from most because it included not only adults, but also pediatric patients as young as 12 years old.
This study found no significant differences across several outcomes for patients receiving a 5-day or 10-day course, when correcting for baseline clinical status.
They did find evidence suggesting that the 10-day course might reduce mortality in the most severe patients at day 14, but the representation of this group in the study population was too low to justify any conclusions [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015301].
Thus, additional research is also required to determine whether the dosage and duration of remdesivir administration influences outcomes.

In summary, remdesivir is a first in class drug due to its FDA approval.
Early investigations of this drug establish proof of principle that drugs targeting the virus can benefit COVID-19 patients.
It also shows proof of principle that SARS-CoV-2 can be targeted at the level of viral replication, since remdesivir targets the viral RNA polymerase at high potency.
Moreover, one of the most successful strategies for developing therapeutics for viral diseases is to target the viral replication machinery, which are typically virally encoded polymerases.
Small molecule drugs targeting viral polymerases are the backbones of treatments for other viral diseases including HIV and Herpes.
Notably, the HIV and herpes polymerases are a reverse transcriptase and a DNA polymerase, respectively, whereas SARS-CoV-2 encodes an RdRP, so most of the commonly used polymerase inhibitors are not likely to be active against SARS-CoV-2.
In clinical use, polymerase inhibitors show short term benefits for HIV patients but for long term benefits they must be part of combination regimens.
They are typically combined with protease inhibitors, integrase inhibitors, and even other polymerase inhibitors.
Additional clinical trials of remdesivir in different patient pools and in combination with other therapies will refine its use in the clinic.

##### Protease Inhibitors

Several studies showed that viral proteases play an important role in the life cycle of viruses, including coronaviruses, by modulating the cleavage of viral polyprotein precursors [@doi:10.2174/138161207780162971].
Several FDA-approved drugs target proteases, including lopinavir and ritonavir for HIV infection and simeprevir for hepatitis C virus infection.
In particular, serine protease inhibitors were suggested for the treatment of SARS and MERS viruses [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.01.011].
Recently, a study [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052] suggested that camostat mesylate, an FDA-approved protease inhibitor (PI) could block the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into lung cells _in vitro_.
However, to test the efficacy of PIs in patients, randomized clinical trials will need to be conducted on patients and healthy volunteers.
Investigation of possible PIs that would work against SARS-CoV-2 has been driven by computational predictions, leading to the computer-aided design of a Michael acceptor inhibitor, N3, to target a protease critical to SARS-CoV-2 replication.

Discovery of the N3 mechanism arose from interest in the two polyproteins encoded by the SARS-CoV-2 replicase gene, pp1a and pp1ab, that are critical for viral replication and transcription [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y].
These polyproteins must undergo proteolytic processing. 
This processing is usually conducted by Mpro, a 33.8-kDa SARS-CoV-2 protease that is therefore fundamental to viral replication and transcription.
N3 was designed computationally [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030324] to bind in the substrate binding pocket of the Mpro protease of SARS-like coronaviruses [@doi:10.1007/s13238-013-2841-3], therefore inhibiting proteolytic processing.
Subsequently, the structure of N3-bound SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was solved [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y], confirming the computational prediction.
N3 was tested _in vitro_ on SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero cells, which belong to a line of cells established from the kidney epithelial cells of an African green monkey, and was found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y].

Although N3 is a strong inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 _in vitro_, its safety and efficacy still need to be tested in healthy volunteers and patients.
After the design and confirmation of N3 as a highly potent Michael acceptor inhibitor and the identification of Mpro's structure [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3405], 10,000 compounds were screened for their _in vitro_ anti-Mpro activity.
The six leads that were identified were ebselen, disulfiram, tideglusib, carmofur, and PX-12.
_In vitro_ analysis revealed that Ebselen had the strongest potency in reducing the viral load in SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero cells [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y].
Ebselen is an organoselenium compound with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [@doi:10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x] 
It has been proposed as a possible treatment for conditions ranging from bipolar disorder to diabetes to heart disease [@doi:10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x], and a preliminary investigation of ebselen as a treatment for noise-induced hearing loss provided promising reports of its safety [@doi:10/gbwnbv].
For COVID-19, the NSP5 in SARS-CoV-2 contains a cysteine at the active site of Mpro, and ebselen is able to inactivate the protease by bonding covalently with this cysteine to form a selenosulfide [@doi:10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x; @doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.06.032].
Interestingly there has been some argument that selenium deficiency may be associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes [@doi:10.3390/nu12072098; @doi:10.1017/S0007114520003128; @doi:10.1016/j.redox.2020.101715], possibly indicating that its antioxidative properties are protective [@doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.06.032].
On the other hand, ebselen and the other compounds identified are likely to be promiscuous binders, which could diminish their therapeutic potential [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y].
While there is clear computational and _in vitro_ support for ebselen's potential as a COVID-19 therapeutic, results from clinical trials are not yet available for this compound.

In summary, N3 is a computationally designed molecule that inhibits the viral transcription through inhibiting Mpro.
Ebselen is both a strong Mpro inhibitor and strong inhibitor of viral replication _in vitro_ that was found to reduce SARS-CoV-2 viral load even more effectively than N3.
Ebselen is a very promising compound since its safety has been demonstrated in other indications.
However, Ebselen is likely a false positive since it is a promiscuous compound that can have many targets [@doi:10.1039/c8cc04258f].
Therefore, compounds with higher specificity may be required to effectively translate to clinical trials.

<!--##### Molecules Targeting the Viral Envelope-->
#### Broad-Spectrum Pharmaceuticals

When a virus enters a host, the host becomes the virus' environment.
Therefore, the state of the host can also influence the virus's ability to replicate and spread.
Traditionally, viral targets have been favored for pharmaceutical interventions because altering host processes is likely to be less specific than targeting the virus directly [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.020].
On the other hand, targeting the host offers potential for a complementary strategy to antivirals that could broadly limit the ability of viruses to replicate [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.020].
As a result, therapeutic approaches that target host proteins have become an area of interest for SARS-CoV-2.
Viral entry receptors in particular have emerged as a target of interest.
Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the cell depends on binding to the Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which is catalyzed by the enzyme encoded by _TMPRSS2_ [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052].
In principle, drugs that reduce the expression of these proteins or sterically hinder viral interactions with them might reduce viral entry into cells.

Due to the urgent nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the pharmaceutical agents that have been widely publicized as having possible therapeutic or prophylactic effects are broad-spectrum pharmaceuticals that pre-date the COVID-19 pandemic.
These treatments are not specifically targeted at the virus itself or at the host receptors it relies on, but rather induce broad shifts in host biology that are hypothesized to be potential inhibitors of the virus.
In most cases, interest in particular candidate medications arises because they are already available for other purposes.
However, the fact that the targets of these agents are non-specific means that the mechanism of action can appear to be relevant to COVID-19 without a therapeutic or prophylactic effect being observed in rigorous testing.
This category of drugs has also received significant attention from the media and general public, often before rigorous testing has been able to determine their effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2.

##### ACEi and ARB

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are among today's most commonly prescribed medications [@url:https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Lisinopril; @doi:10.1056/NEJMp1901657].
In the United States, for example, they are prescribed well over 100,000,000 times annually.
Data from some animal models suggest that several, but not all, ACE inhibitors and several ARBs increase ACE2 expression in the cells of some organs [@doi:10.1093/cvr/cvaa097].
Clinical studies have not established whether plasma ACE2 expression is increased in humans treated with these medications [@doi:10.1093/europace/euw246].
While randomized clinical trials are ongoing, a variety of observational studies have examined the relationship between exposure to ACE inhibitors or ARBs and outcomes in patients with COVID-19.
An observational study of the association of exposure to ACE inhibitors or ARB with outcomes in COVID-19 was retracted from the _New England Journal of Medicine_ [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007621].
Moreover, because observational studies are subject to confounding, randomized controlled trials are the standard means of assessing the effects of medications, and the findings of the various observational studies bearing on this topic cannot be interpreted as indicating a protective effect of the drug [@doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317205; @doi:10.2215/CJN.03530320].
Several clinical trials testing the effects of ACE inhibitors or ARBs on COVID-19 outcomes are ongoing [@clinicaltrials:NCT04338009; @clinicaltrials:NCT04353596; @clinicaltrials:NCT04311177; @clinicaltrials:NCT04312009; @clinicaltrials:NCT04330300; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366050].
These studies of randomized intervention will provide important data for understanding whether exposure to ACEis or ARBs is associated with COVID-19 outcomes.
Additional information about ACE2, observational studies of ACE inhibitors and ARBs in COVID-19, and clinical trials on this topic have been summarized [@url:http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2].

##### Hydroxychloroquine and Chloroquine

Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are lysosomotropic agents, meaning they are weak bases that can pass through the plasma membrane.
Both drugs increase cellular pH by accumulating in their protonated form inside lysosomes [@doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-163; @doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
This shift in pH inhibits the breakdown of proteins and peptides by the lysosomes during the process of proteolysis [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
A number of mechanisms have been proposed through which these drugs could influence the immune response to pathogen challenge.
For example, CQ/HCQ can interfere with digestion of antigens within the lysosome and inhibit CD4 T-cell stimulation while promoting the stimulation of CD8 T-cells [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
CQ/HCQ can also decrease the production of certain key cytokines involved in the immune response, including interleukin-6 (IL-6), and inhibit the stimulation of toll-like receptors (TLR) and TLR signaling [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
The drugs also have anti-inflammatory and photoprotective effects and may also affect rates of cell death, blood clotting, glucose tolerance, and cholesterol levels [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].

Interest in CQ and HCQ for treating COVID-19 was catalyzed by a mechanism observed in _in vitro_ studies of both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2.
In one study, CQ inhibited viral entry of SARS-CoV-1 into Vero E6 cells, a cell line that was derived from Vero cells in 1968, through the elevation of endosomal pH and the terminal glycosylation of the cellular entry receptor, ACE2 [@doi:10.1186/1743-422X-2-69].
Increased pH within the cell, as discussed above, inhibits proteolysis, and terminal glycosylation of ACE2 is thought to interfere with virus-receptor binding.
An _in vitro_ study of SARS-CoV-2 infection of Vero cells found both HCQ and CQ to be effective in inhibiting viral replication, with HCQ being more potent [@doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa237].
Additionally, an early case study of three COVID-19 patients reported the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in all three patients [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2007575].
Antiphospholipid antibodies are central to the diagnosis of the antiphospholipid syndrome, a disorder that HCQ has often been used to treat [@doi:10.1182/blood.V128.22.5023.5023; @doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.053; @doi:10.1182/asheducation-2016.1.714].
Because the 90% effective concentration (EC~90~) of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) can be achieved in and tolerated by rheumatoid arthritis patients, it was hypothesized that it might also be possible to achieve the effective concentration in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114].
Additionally, HCQ has been found to be effective in treating HIV [@doi:10/cq2hx9] and chronic Hepatitis C [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575].
Together, these studies triggered initial enthusiasm about the therapeutic potential for HCQ and CQ against COVID-19.
HCQ/CQ has been proposed both as a treatment for COVID-19 and a prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 exposure.
HCQ/CQ are sometimes administered with azithromycin (AZ) and/or zinc supplementation.
<!--
rishirajgoel to add text on Azithromycin
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4262884/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5918160/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28099856
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27911847
-->

###### Therapeutic Administration of HCQ/CQ

The initial study evaluating HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19 patients was published on March 20, 2020 by Gautret et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105949].
This non-randomized, non-blinded, non-placebo clinical trial compared HCQ to standard of care (SOC) in 42 hospitalized patients in southern France.
They reported that patients who received HCQ showed higher rates of virological clearance by nasopharyngeal swab on Days 3-6 when compared to standard care.
This study also treated six patients with both HCQ + AZ and found this combination therapy to be more effective than HCQ alone.
However, the design and analyses used showed weaknesses that severely limit interpretability of results, including the lack of randomization, lack of blinding, lack of placebo, lack of Intention-To-Treat analysis, lack of correction for sequential multiple comparisons, trial arms entirely confounded by hospital, false negatives in outcome measurements, lack of trial pre-registration, and small sample size.
Two of these weaknesses are due to inappropriate data analysis and can therefore be corrected _post hoc_ by recalculating the p-values (lack of Intention-To-Treat analysis and multiple comparisons).
However, all other weaknesses are fundamental design flaws and cannot be corrected for.
Thus, conclusions cannot be generalized outside of the study.
The International Society of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, the scientific organization that publishes _International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents_ where the article appeared, has announced that the article does not meet its expected standard for publications [@url:https://www.isac.world/news-and-publications/official-isac-statement], although it has not been officially retracted.
Because of the preliminary data presented in this study, the use of HCQ in COVID-19 treatment was subsequently explored by other researchers.
About one week later, a follow-up case study reported that 11 consecutive patients were treated with HCQ + AZ using the same dosing regimen [@doi:10.1016/j.medmal.2020.03.006].
One patient died, two were transferred to the ICU, and one developed a prolonged QT interval, leading to discontinuation of HCQ + AZ.
As in the Gautret et al. study, the outcome assessed was virological clearance at Day 6 post-treatment, as measured in nasopharyngeal swabs.
Of the ten living patients on Day 6, eight remained positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Like in the original study, interpretability was severely limited by the lack of a comparison group and the small sample size.
However, these results stand in contrast to the claims by Gautret et al. that all six patients treated with HCQ + AZ tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA by Day 6 post-treatment.
This case study illustrated the need for further investigation using robust study design to evaluate the efficacy of HCQ and/or CQ.

On April 10, 2020, a randomized, non-placebo trial of 62 COVID-19 patients at the Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University was released [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040758].
This study investigated whether HCQ decreased time to fever break or time to cough relief when compared to SOC [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040758].
This trial found HCQ decreased both average time to fever break and average time to cough relief, defined as mild or no cough.
While this study improved on some of the methodological flaws in Gautret et al. by randomizing patients, it also had several flaws in trial design and data analysis that prevent generalization of the results.
These weaknesses include the lack of placebo, lack of correction for multiple primary outcomes, inappropriate choice of outcomes, lack of sufficient detail to understand analysis, drastic disparities between pre-registration and published protocol, and small sample size.
The choice of outcomes may be inappropriate as both fevers and cough may break periodically without resolution of illness.
Additionally, for these outcomes, the authors reported that 23 of 62 patients did not have a fever and 25 of 62 patients did not have a cough at the start of the study, but the authors failed to describe how these patients were included in a study assessing time to fever break and time to cough relief.
It is important to note here that the authors claimed "neither the research performers nor the patients were aware of the treatment assignments."
This blinding seems impossible in a non-placebo trial because at the very least, providers would know whether they were administering a medication or not, and this knowledge could lead to systematic differences in the administration of care.
Correction for multiple primary outcomes can be adjusted _post hoc_ by recalculating p-values, but all of the other issues were design and statistical weaknesses that cannot be corrected for.
Additionally, the observation of drastic disparities between pre-registration and published protocol could indicate p-hacking [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002106].
The design limitations mean that the conclusions cannot be generalized outside of the study.
A second randomized trial, conducted by the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, analyzed whether HCQ increased rates of virological clearance at day 7 in respiratory pharyngeal swabs compared to standard care [@doi:10/drbx].
This trial was published in Chinese along with an abstract in English, and only the English abstract was read and interpreted for this review.
The trial found comparable outcomes in virological clearance rate, time to virological clearance, and time to body temperature normalization between the treatment and control groups.
A known weakness is small sample size, with only 30 patients enrolled and 15 in each arm.
This problem suggests the study is underpowered to detect potentially useful differences and precludes interpretation of results.
Additionally, because only the abstract could be read, other design and analysis issues could be present.
Thus, though these studies added randomization to their assessment of HCQ, their conclusions should be interpreted very cautiously.
These two studies assessed different outcomes and reached differing conclusions about the efficacy of HCQ for treating COVID-19; the designs of both studies, especially with respect to sample size, meant that no general conclusions can be made about the efficacy of the drug.

Several widely reported studies on HCQ have issues with data integrity and/or provenance.
A Letter to the Editor published in _BioScience Trends_ on March 16, 2020 claimed that numerous clinical trials have shown that HCQ is superior to control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of COVID-19 pneumonia [@doi:10.5582/bst.2020.01047].
This letter has been cited by numerous primary literature, review articles, and media alike [@doi:10.7150/ijbs.45498; @doi:10.7150/ijbs.45053].
However, the letter referred to 15 pre-registration identifiers from the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry.
When these identifiers are followed back to the registry, most trials claim they are not yet recruiting patients or are currently recruiting patients.
For all of these 15 identifiers, no data uploads or links to publications could be located on the pre-registrations.
At the very least, the lack of availability of the primary data means the claim that HCQ is efficacious against COVID-19 pneumonia cannot be verified.
Similarly, a recent multinational registry analysis [@doi:10/ggwzsb] analyzed the efficacy of CQ and HCQ with and without a macrolide, which is a class of antibiotics that includes Azithromycin, for the treatment of COVID-19.
The study observed 96,032 patients split into a control and four treatment conditions (CQ with and without a macrolide; HCQ with and without a macrolide).
They concluded that treatment with CQ and HCQ was associated with increased risk of _de novo_ ventricular arrhythmia during hospitalization.
However, this study has since been retracted by _The Lancet_ due to an inability to validate the data used [@doi:10/ggzqng].
These studies demonstrate that increased skepticism in evaluation of the HCQ/CQ and COVID-19 literature may be warranted, possible because of the significant attention HCQ and CQ have received as possible treatments for COVID-19 and the politicization of these drugs.

Despite the fact that the study suggesting that CQ/HCQ increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia in COVID-19 patients has now been retracted, previous studies have identified risks associated with HCQ/CQ.
A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus developed a prolonged QT interval that was likely exacerbated by use of HCQ in combination with renal failure [@doi:10.1155/2016/4626279].
A prolonged QT interval is associated with ventricular arrhythmia [@doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2008.05.008].
Furthermore, a separate study [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551] investigated the safety associated with the use of HCQ with and without macrolides between 2000 and 2020.
The study involved 900,000 cases treated with HCQ and 300,000 cases treated with HCQ + AZ.
The results indicated that short-term use of HCQ was not associated with additional risk, but that HCQ + AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and a two-fold increased risk of mortality.
Therefore, whether studies utilize HCQ alone or HCQ in combination with a macrolide may be an important consideration in assessing risk.
As results from initial investigations of these drug combinations have emerged, concerns about the efficacy and risks of treating COVID-19 with HCQ and CQ has led to the removal of CQ/HCQ from SOC practices in several countries [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.07.20056424; @url:https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/13/health/chloroquine-risks-coronavirus-treatment-trials-study/index.html].
As of May 25, 2020, WHO had suspended administration of HCQ as part of the worldwide Solidarity Trial [@raw:WHO_briefing_2020_5_25], and later the final results of this large-scale trial that compared 947 patients administered HCQ to 906 controls revealed no effect on the primary outcome, mortality during hospitalization (rate ratio: 1.19; P=0.23)

As additional research has emerged, HCQ/CQ have increasingly been demonstrated to be ineffective against COVID-19 and to carry a number of significant side effects.
A randomized, open-label, non-placebo trial of 150 COVID-19 patients was conducted in parallel at 16 government-designated COVID-19 centers in China to assess the safety and efficacy of HCQ [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.10.20060558].
The trial compared treatment with HCQ in conjunction with SOC to SOC alone in 150 infected patients who were assigned randomly to the two groups (75 per group).
The primary endpoint of the study was the negative conversion rate of SARS-CoV-2 in 28 days, and the investigators found no difference in this parameter between the groups.
The secondary endpoints were an amelioration of the symptoms of the disease such as axillary temperature ≤36.6°C, SpO2 >94% on room air, and disappearance of symptoms like shortness of breath, cough, and sore throat.
The median time to symptom alleviation was similar across different conditions (19 days in HCQ+SOC vs. 21 days in SOC).
Additionally, 30% of the patients receiving SOC+HCQ reported adverse outcomes compared to 8.8% of patients receiving only SOC, with the most common adverse outcome in the SOC+HCQ group being diarrhea (10% vs. 0% in the SOC group, p=0.004).
However, there are several factors that limit the interpretability of this study.
Most of the enrolled patients had mild-to-moderate symptoms (98%), and the average age was 46.
SOC in this study included the use of antivirals (Lopinavir-Ritonavir, Arbidol, Oseltamivir, Virazole, Entecavir, Ganciclovir, and Interferon alfa), which appeared to introduce confounding effects.
Thus, to isolate the effect of HCQ, SOC would need to exclude the use of antivirals.
In this trial, the samples used to test for the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus were collected from the upper respiratory tract, and the authors indicated that the use of upper respiratory samples may have introduced false negatives (e.g., [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786]).
Another limitation of the study that the authors acknowledge was that the HCQ treatment began, on average, at a 16-day delay from the symptom onset.
The fact that this study was open-label and lacked a placebo limits interpretation, and additional analysis is required to determine whether HCQ reduces inflammatory response.
Therefore, despite some potential areas of investigation identified in _post hoc_ analysis, this study cannot be interpreted as providing support for HCQ as a therapeutic against COVID-19.

Additional evidence comes from a retrospective analysis [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920] that examined data from 368 COVID-19 patients across all United States Veteran Health Administration medical centers.
The study retrospectively investigated the effect of the administration of HCQ (n=97), HCQ + AZ (n=113), and no HCQ (n=158) on 368 patients.
The primary outcomes assessed were death and the need for mechanical ventilation.
Standard supportive care was rendered to all patients.
Due to the low representation of women (N=17) in the available data, the study included only men, and the median age was 65 years.
The rate of death in the HCQ-only treatment condition was 27.8% and in the HCQ + AZ treatment condition, it was 22.1%.
In comparison to the 14.1% rate of death in the no-HCQ cohort, these data indicated a statistically significant elevation in the risk of death for the HCQ-only group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 2.61, p=0.03), but not for the HCQ + AZ group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 1.14; p=0.72).
Further, the risk of ventilation was similar across all three groups (adjusted HR: 1.43, p=0.48 (HCQ) and 0.43, p=0.09 (HCQ + AZ) compared to no HCQ).
The study thus showed evidence of an association between increased mortality and HCQ in this cohort of COVID-19 patients but no change in rates of mechanical ventilation among the treatment conditions.
The study had a few limitations: it was not randomized, and the baseline vital signs, laboratory tests, and prescription drug use were significantly different among the three groups.
All of these factors could potentially influence treatment outcome.
Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not part of the study.
The reported result that HCQ + AZ is safer than HCQ contradicts the findings of the previous large-scale analysis of twenty years of records that found HCQ + AZ to be more frequently associated with cardiac arrhythmia than HCQ alone [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551]; whether this discrepancy is caused by the pathology of COVID-19, is influenced by age or sex, or is a statistical artifact is not presently known.

Finally, findings from the Randomized Evaluation of COVID-19 Therapy (RECOVERY) trial were released on October 8, 2020.
This study used a randomized, open-label design to study the effects of HCQ compared to standard care at 176 hospitals in the United Kingdom [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2022926].
This large study enrolled 11,197 hospitalized patients whose physicians believed it would not harm them to participate.
Patients were randomized into either the control group or one of the treatment arms, with twice as many patients enrolled in the control group as any treatment group.
Of the patients eligible to receive HCQ, 1,561 were randomized into the HCQ arm while 3,155 were randomized into the control arm.
The demographics of the HCQ and control groups were similar in terms of average age (65 years), proportion female (approximately 38%), ethnic make-up (73% versus 76% white), and prevalence of pre-existing conditions (56% versus 57% overall).
In the HCQ arm of the study, patients received 800 mg at baseline and again after 6 hours, then 400 mg at 12 hours and every subsequent 12 hours.
The primary outcome analyzed was all-cause mortality, and patient vital statistics were reported by physicians upon discharge or death, or else at 28 days following HCQ administration if they remained hospitalized.
The secondary outcome assessed was the combined risk of progression to invasive mechanical ventilation or death within 28 days.
By the advice of an external data monitoring committee, the HCQ arm of the study was reviewed early, leading to it being closed due a lack of support for HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19.
Patients who received HCQ had a longer duration of hospitalization than patients receiving usual care, were less likely to be discharged alive within 28 days, and were more likely to progress to mechanical ventilation.
This large-scale study thus builds upon studies in the United States and China to suggest that HCQ is not an effective treatment, and in fact may negatively impact COVID-19 patients due to its side effects.
The rates of COVID-19-related reported in the RECOVERY trial did not differ between the control and HCQ arms, but patients receiving HCQ were more likely to die due to cardiac events.
Therefore, though none of the studies have been blinded, taken together it becomes clear that all of the available evidence points to significant concerns about the administration of HCQ to hospitalized COVID-19 patients, without providing any support for its efficacy.

###### HCQ for the Treatment of Mild Cases

One additional possible therapeutic application considered was the treatment of mild COVID-19 cases in otherwise healthy individuals.
This possibility was assessed in a randomized, open-label, multi-center analysis conducted in Catalonia (Spain) [@doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1009].
This analysis enrolled adults 18 and older who had been experiencing mild symptoms of COVID-19 for fewer than five days.
Participants were randomized into an HCQ arm (N=136) and a control arm (N=157), and those in the treatment arm were administered 800 mg of HCQ on the first day of treatment followed by 400 mg on each of the subsequent six days.
The primary outcome assessed was viral clearance at days 3 and 7 following the onset of treatment, and secondary outcomes were clinical progression and time to complete resolution of symptoms.
They found no significant differences between the two groups.
This study thus suggests that HCQ does not improve recovery from COVID-19, even in otherwise healthy adult patients with mild symptoms.

###### Prophylactic Administration of HCQ

An initial study of the possible prophylactic application of HCQ utilized a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design to analyze the administration of HCQ prophylactically [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638].
Asymptomatic adults in the United States and Canada who had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 within the past four days were enrolled in an online study to see whether administration of HCQ over five days would influence the probability of developing COVID-19 symptoms over a 14-day period.
Of the participants, 414 received HCQ and 407 received a placebo.
The participants averaged 40 years of age and 51.6% were women.
They found no significant difference in the rate of symptomatic illness between the two groups (11.8% HCQ, 14.3% placebo, p=0.35).
The HCQ condition was associated with side effects, with 40.1% of patients reporting side effects compared to 16.8% in the control group (p<0.001).
However, likely due to the high enrollment of healthcare workers (66% of participants) and the well-known side effects associated with HCQ, a large number of participants were able to correctly identify whether they were receiving HCQ or a placebo (46.5% and 35.7%, respectively).
Furthermore, due to a lack of availability of diagnostic testing, only 20 of the 107 cases were confirmed with a PCR-based test to be positive for SARS-CoV-2.
The rest were categorized as "probable" or "possible" cases by a panel of four physicians who were blind to the treatment status.
One possible confounder is that a patient presenting one or more symptoms, which included diarrhea, was defined as a "possible" case, but diarrhea is also a common side effect of HCQ.
Additionally, four of the twenty PCR-confirmed cases did not develop symptoms until after the observation period had completed, suggesting that the 14-day trial period may not have been long enough or that some participants also encountered secondary exposure events.
Finally, in addition to the young age of the participants in this study, which ranged from 32 to 51, there were possible impediments to generalization introduced by the selection process, as 2,237 patients who were eligible but had already developed symptoms by day 4 were enrolled in a separate study.
It is therefore likely that asymptomatic cases were over-represented in this sample, which would not have been detected based on the diagnostic criteria used.
Therefore, while this study does represent the first effort to conduct a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled investigation of HCQ's effect on COVID-19 symptoms in a large sample, the lack of PCR tests and several other design flaws significantly impede interpretation of the results.
However, in line with the results from therapeutic studies, there is no evidence that HCQ provides protection against COVID-19.

A second study [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.6319] examined the effect of administering HCQ to healthcare workers as a pre-exposure prophylactic.
The primary outcome assessed was the conversion from SARS-CoV-2 negative to SARS-CoV-2 positive status over the 8 week study period.
This study was also randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled and sought to address some of the limitations of the first prophylactic study.
They aimed to enroll 200 healthcare workers, preferentially those working with COVID-19 patients, at two hospitals within the University of Pennsylvania hospital system in Philadelphia, PA.
Participants were randomized 1:1 to receive either 600 mg of HCQ daily or a placebo, and their SARS-CoV-2 infection status and antibody status were assessed using RT-PCR and serological testing, respectively, at baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks following the beginning of the treatment period.
The statistical design of the study accounted for interim analyses at 50 and 100 participants in case efficacy or futility of HCQ for prophylaxis became clear earlier than completion of enrollment.
The 139 individuals enrolled comprised a study population that was fairly young (average age 33) and made of largely of people who were white, women, and without pre-existing conditions.
At the second interim analysis, more individuals in the treatment group than the control group had contracted COVID-19 (4 versus 3), causing the estimate z-score to fall below the pre-established threshold for futility.
As a result, the trial was terminated early, offering additional evidence against the use of HCQ for prophylaxis.

###### Summary of HCQ/CQ Research Findings

Early _in vitro_ evidence indicated that HCQ could be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, leading to early interest in its potential as both a therapeutic and prophylaxis.
Initially it was hypothesized that CQ/HCQ might be effective against SARS-CoV-2, especially since CQ and HCQ have both been found to inhibit the expression of CD154 in T-cells and to reduce TLR signaling that leads to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [@doi:10.1038/s41584-020-0372-x].
Clinical trials for COVID-19 have more often used HCQ rather than CQ because it offers the advantages of being cheaper and having fewer side effects than CQ.
However, a large analysis of patients receiving HCQ from January 2000 through March 2020 reported that the combination of HCQ and azithromycin, but not other macrolides, was associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular complications and mortality.
Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess HCQ as a therapeutic agent for COVID-19, and many more are in progress.
To date, none of these studies have used randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled designs with a large sample size, which would be the gold standard.
Despite the design limitations (which would be more likely to produce false positives than false negatives), initial optimism about HCQ has not been substantiated by these studies.
The most methodologically rigorous HCQ-focused analysis to date [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638] evaluated the prophylactic potential of HCQ and found no significant differences between the treatment and control groups, and the WHO's global Solidarity trial  similarly reported no effect of HCQ on mortality.
Thus, HCQ/CQ are not likely to be effective therapeutic or prophylactic agents against COVID-19.
Additionally, one study identified an increased risk of mortality in older men receiving HCQ, and administration of HCQ and HCQ+AZ did not decrease the use of mechanical ventilation in these patients [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920].
HCQ use for COVID-19 could also lead to shortages for anti-malarial or anti-rheumatic use, where it has been definitively proven to be effective.
Despite significant attention, these drugs appear to be ineffective against COVID-19.
Several countries have now removed CQ from their SOC for COVID-19 due to the lack of evidence of efficacy and the frequency of adverse effects.

##### Dexamethasone

Dexamethasone (9α-fluoro-16α-methylprednisolone) is a synthetic corticosteroid that binds to glucocorticoid receptors [@doi:10.1021/cr068203e; @url:https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/dexamethasone/].
It was first synthesized in the late 1950s as an anti-inflammatory and has been used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory conditions [@doi:10.1021/ja01545a061; @doi:10.1001/jama.1960.03030070009002].
Steroids such as dexamethasone are widely available and affordable, and they are often used to treat community-acquired pneumonia [@doi:10.1038/s41392-020-0127-9].
A clinical trial that began in 2012 recently reported that dexamethasone may improve outcomes for patients with ARDS [@doi:10/ggpxzc].
However, meta-analysis of a small amount of available data regarding the use of dexamethasone to treat SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with patient harm [@doi:10/ggks86], although these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included [@doi:10/ggq356].
Dexamethasone works as an anti-inflammatory by binding to glucocorticoid receptors with higher affinity than endogenous cortisol [@doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-48110-6.00034-X].
In order to understand how dexamethasone works to reduce inflammation, it is necessary to consider the stress response more broadly.
In response to stress, corticotropin‐releasing hormone stimulates the release of neurotransmitters known as catecholamines, such as epinephrine, and steroid hormones known as glucocorticoids, such as cortisol [@doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.008; @doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04229.x].
While catecholamines are often associated with the fight-or-flight response, the specific role that glucocorticoids play is less clear, although they are thought to be important to restoring homeostasis [@doi:10.1159/000054578].
Immune challenge is a stressor that is known to interact closely with the stress response.
The immune system can therefore interact with the central nervous system; for example, macrophages can both respond to and produce catecholamines [@doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.008].
Additionally, the production of both catecholamines and glucocorticoids is associated with inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-12, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF‐α) and the stimulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10, meaning that the stress response can regulate inflammatory immune activity [@doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04229.x].
Administration of dexamethasone has been found to correspond to dose-dependent inhibition of IL-12 production, but not to affect IL-10 [@PMID:8902882]; the fact that this relationship could be disrupted by administration of a glucocorticoid-receptor antagonist suggests that it is regulated by the receptor itself [@PMID:8902882]. <!-- Note: waiting for full text of this paper, this is based on abstract and citations-->
Thus, the administration of dexamethasone for COVID-19 is likely to simulate the release of glucocorticoids endogenously during stress, resulting in binding of the synthetic steroid to the glucocorticoid receptor and the associated inhibition of the production of proinflammatory cytokines.
In this model, dexamethasone reduces inflammation by stimulating the mechanism that reduces inflammation following a threat such as immune challenge.
Immunosuppressive drugs such as steroids are typically contraindicated in the setting of infection [@doi:10.1177/2040622313485275], but because COVID-19 results in hyperinflammation that appears to contribute to mortality via lung damage, immunosuppression may be a helpful approach to treatment [@doi:10/ggnzmc].
The decision of whether and/or when to counter hyperinflammation with immunosuppression in the setting of COVID-19 was an area of intense debate, as the risks of inhibiting antiviral immunity needed to be weighed against the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects [@doi:10/ggq8hs].
As a result, guidelines early in the pandemic typically recommended avoiding treating COVID-19 patients with corticosteroids such as dexamethasone [@doi:10/ggks86].

The application of dexamethasone for the treatment of COVID-19 was evaluated as part of the multi-site RECOVERY trial in the United Kingdom [@doi:10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273].
Over 6,000 hospitalized COVID-19 patients were assigned into standard care or treatment (dexamethasone) arms of the trial with a 2:1 ratio.
At the time of randomization, some patients were ventilated (16%), others were on non-invasive oxygen (60%), and others were breathing independently (24%).
Patients in the treatment arm were administered dexamethasone either orally or intravenously at 6 mg per day for up to 10 days.
The primary end-point was the patient's status at 28-days post-randomization (mortality, discharge, or continued hospitalization), and secondary outcomes analyzed included the progression to invasive mechanical ventilation over the same period.
The 28-day mortality rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the standard care group (21.6% vs 24.6%, p <0.001).
However, this finding was driven by differences in mortality among patients who were receiving mechanical ventilation or supplementary oxygen at the start of the study.
The report indicated that dexamethasone reduced 28-day mortality relative to standard care in patients who were ventilated (29.3% vs. 41.4%) and among those who were receiving oxygen supplementation (23.3% vs. 26.2%) at randomization, but not in patients who were breathing independently (17.8% vs. 14.0%).
One possible confounder is that patients receiving mechanical ventilation tended to be younger than patients who were not receiving respiratory support (by 10 years on average) and to have had symptoms for a longer period.
However, adjusting for age did not change their conclusions, although the duration of symptoms was found to be significantly associated with the effect of dexamethasone administration.
These findings also suggested that dexamethasone may have reduced progression to mechanical ventilation, especially among patients who were receiving oxygen support at randomization.
Thus, this large, randomized, and multi-site, albeit not placebo-controlled, study suggests that administration of dexamethasone to patients who are unable to breathe independently may significantly improve survival outcomes.
Additionally, dexamethasone is a widely available and affordable medication, raising the hope that it could be made available to COVID-19 patients globally.

The results of the RECOVERY trial's analysis of dexamethasone suggest that this therapeutic is effective primarily in  patients who had been experiencing symptoms for at least seven days and patients who were not breathing independently [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2021436].
Thus, it seems likely that dexamethasone is useful for treating inflammation associated with immunopathy or cytokine release syndrome.
In fact, corticosteroids such as dexamethasone are sometimes used to treat CRS [@doi:10.1182/blood-2014-05-552729].
It is not surprising that administration of an immunosuppressant would be most beneficial when the immune system was dysregulated towards inflammation.
However, it is also unsurprising that care must be taken in administering an immunosuppressant to patients fighting a viral infection.
In particular, the concern has been raised that treatment with dexamethasone might increase patient susceptibility to concurrent (e.g., nosocomial) infections [@doi:10.23812/20-EDITORIAL_1-5].
Additionally, the drug could potentially slow viral clearance and inhibit patients' ability to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.23812/20-EDITORIAL_1-5; @doi:10/ggks86]. 
Furthermore, dexamethasone has been associated with side effects that include psychosis, glucocorticoid-induced diabetes, and avascular necrosis [@doi:10/ggks86], and the RECOVERY trial did not report outcomes with enough detail to be able to determine whether they observed similar complications.
However, since these results were released, strategies have been proposed for administering dexamethasone alongside more targeted treatments to minimize the likelihood of negative side effects [@doi:10.23812/20-EDITORIAL_1-5].
Given the available evidence, dexamethasone is currently the most promising treatment for severe COVID-19.

### Biologics

Biologics are produced from components of living organisms or viruses.
They include treatments such as humanized monoclonal antibodies (mAb) tocilizumab (TCZ), and neutralizing antibodies (nAbs), as well as prophylactics such as vaccines.
Historically produced from animal tissue, biologics have become increasingly feasible to produce as recombinant DNA technologies have advanced [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2009.10.006].
Often, they are glycoproteins or peptides [@doi:10.2174/138920006774832604], but whole viruses can also be used therapeutically or prophylactically, not only for vaccines but also as vectors for gene therapy or therapeutic proteins or for oncolytic virotherapy [@doi:10.3390/jcm9040972].
They are typically catabolized by the body to their amino acid components [@doi:10.2174/138920006774832604].
There are many differences on the development side between biologics and synthesized pharmaceuticals, such as small molecule drugs.
Biologics are typically orders of magnitude larger than small molecule drugs and their physiochemical properties are often much less understood [@doi:10.2174/138920006774832604].
They are often heat sensitive, and their toxicity can vary, as it is not directly associated with the primary effects of the drug [@doi:10.2174/138920006774832604].
However, this class includes some extremely significant medical breakthroughs, including insulin for the management of diabetes and the smallpox vaccine.
As a result, it is another possible avenue through which the pharmacological management of SARS-CoV-2 infection can be explored. 

#### Tocilizumab

TCZ is a receptor antibody that was developed to manage chronic inflammation caused by the continuous synthesis of the cytokine IL-6 [@doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a016295].
IL-6 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine belonging to the interleukin family, which is comprised by immune system regulators that are primarily responsible for immune cell differentiation.
Often used to treat conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis [@doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a016295], TCZ has become a pharmaceutical of interest for the treatment of COVID-19 because of the role IL-6 plays in this disease. 
While secretion of IL-6 can be associated with chronic conditions, it is a key player in the innate immune response and is secreted by macrophages in response to the detection of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) [@doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a016295].
An analysis of 191 in-patients at two Wuhan hospitals revealed that blood concentrations of IL-6 differed between patients who did and did not recover from COVID-19.
Patients who ultimately deceased had higher IL-6 levels at admission than those who recovered [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
Additionally, IL-6 levels remained higher throughout the course of hospitalization in the patients who ultimately deceased [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
This finding provided some early evidence that COVID-19 deaths may be induced by the hyperactive immune response, often referred to as cytokine release syndrome (CRS) or cytokine storm syndrome (CSS), as IL-6 plays a key role in this response [@doi:10.1128/mmbr.05015-11].
In this context, the observation of elevated IL-6 in patients who died may reflect an over-production of proinflammatory interleukins, suggesting that TCZ may palliate some of the most severe symptoms of COVID-19 associated with increased cytokine production.

Human IL-6 is a 26-kDa glycoprotein that consists of 184 amino acids and contains two potential N-glycosylation sites and four cysteine residues. 
It binds to a type I cytokine receptor (IL-6Rα or glycoprotein 80) that exists in both membrane-bound (IL-6Rα) and soluble (sIL-6Rα) forms [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
It is not the binding of IL-6 to the receptor that initiates pro- and/or anti-inflammatory signaling, but rather the binding of the complex to another subunit, known as IL-6Rβ or glycoprotein 130 (gp13) [@doi:10.7150/ijbs.4989; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
Unlike membrane-bound IL-6Rα, which is only found on hepatocytes and some types of leukocytes, gp130 is found on most cells [@doi:10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9].
When IL-6 binds to sIL-6Rα, the complex can then bind to a gp130 protein on any cell [@doi:10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9].
The binding of IL-6 to IL-6Rα is termed classical signaling, while its binding to sIL-6Rα is termed trans-signaling [@doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2012.04.001; @doi:10.1042/bj3000281; @doi:10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9].
These two signaling processes are thought to play different roles in health and illness.
For example, trans-signaling may play a role in the proliferation of mucosal T-helper TH2 cells associated with asthma, while an earlier step in this proliferation process may be regulated by classical signaling [@doi:10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9].
Similarly, IL-6 is known to play a role in Crohn's Disease via trans-, but not classical, signaling [@doi:10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9].
Both classical and trans-signaling can occur through three independent pathways: the Janus-activated kinase-STAT3 pathway, the Ras/Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases (MAPK) pathway and the Phosphoinositol-3 Kinase/Akt pathway [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
These signaling pathways are involved in a variety of different functions, including cell type differentiation, immunoglobulin synthesis, and cellular survival signaling pathways, respectively [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
The ultimate result of the IL-6 cascade is to direct transcriptional activity of various promoters of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, TFN, and even IL-6 itself, through the activity of NF-κB [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
IL-6 synthesis is tightly regulated both transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally, and it has been shown that viral proteins can enhance transcription of the IL-6 gene by strengthening the DNA-binding activity between several transcription factors and IL-6 gene-cis-regulatory elements [@doi:10.2492/inflammregen.33.054].
Therefore, drugs inhibiting the binding of IL-6 to IL-6Rα or sIL-6Rα are of interest for combating the hyperactive inflammatory response characteristic of CRS and CSS.
TCZ is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds both to the insoluble and soluble receptor of IL-6, providing de facto inhibition of the IL-6 immune cascade.

Tocilizumab is being administered either as an intervention or as concomitant medication in {{ebm_tocilizumab_ct}} COVID-19 clinical trials (Figure @fig:ebm-trials).
No randomized, placebo-controlled studies of TCZ have currently released results.
Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn about its efficacy for the treatment of COVID-19.
However, early interest in TCZ as a possible treatment for COVID-19 emerged from a very small retrospective study in China that examined 20 patients with severe symptoms in early February 2020 and reported rapid improvement in symptoms following treatment with TCZ [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2005615117].
Subsequently, a number of retrospective studies have been conducted in several countries.
Many studies use a retrospective, observational design, where they compare outcomes for COVID-19 patients who received TCZ to those who did not over a set period of time.
For example, one of the largest retrospective, observational analysis released to date [@doi:10/d2pk] compared the rates at which patients who received TCZ deceased or progressed to invasive medical ventilation over a 14-day period compared to patients receiving only SOC.
Under this definition, SOC could include other drugs such as HCQ, azithromycin, lopinavir-ritonavir or darunavir-cobicistat, or heparin.
While this study was not randomized, a subset of patients who were eligible to receive TCZ were unable to obtain it due to shortages; however, these groups were not directly compared in the analysis.
After adjusting for variables such as age, sex, and SOFA score, they found that patients treated with TCZ were less likely to progress to invasive medical ventilation and/or death (adjusted HR = 0.61, CI 0.40-0.92, p=0.020), although analysis of death and ventilation separately suggests that this effect may have been driven by differences in the death rate (20% of control versus 7% of TCZ-treated patients).
They reported particular benefits for patients whose PaO~2~/FiO~2~ ratio, also known as the Horowitz Index for Lung Function, fell below a 150 mm Hg threshold.
They found no differences between groups administered subcutaneous versus intravenous TCZ.

Another retrospective observational analysis of interest examined the charts of patients at a hospital in Connecticut, USA where 64% of all 239 COVID-19 patients in the study period were administered TCZ based on assignment by a standardized algorithm [@doi:10.1016/j.chest.2020.06.006].
They found that TCZ administration was associated with more similar rates of survivorship in patients with severe versus nonsevere COVID-19 at intake, defined based on the amount of supplemental oxygen needed.
They therefore proposed that their algorithm was able to identify patients presenting with or likely to develop CRS as good candidates for TCZ.
This study also reported higher survivorship in Black and Hispanic patients compared to white patients when adjusted for age.
The major limitation with interpretation for these studies is that there may be clinical characteristics that influenced medical practitioners decisions to administer TCZ to some patients and not others.
One interesting example therefore comes from an analysis of patients at a single hospital in Brescia, Italy, where TCZ was not available for a period of time [@doi:10.1016/j.ejim.2020.05.009].
This study compared COVID-19 patients admitted to the hospital before and after March 13, 2020, when the hospital received TCZ.
Therefore, patients who would have been eligible for TCZ prior to this arbitrary date did not receive it as treatment, making this retrospective analysis something of a natural experiment.
Despite this design, demographic factors did not appear to be consistent between the two groups, and the average age of the control group was older than the TCZ group.
The control group also had a higher percentage of males and a higher incidence of comorbidities such as diabetes and heart disease.
All the same, the multivariate HR, which adjusted for these clinical and demographic factors, found a significant difference between survival in the two groups (HR=0.035, CI=0.004-0.347, p = 0.004).
They reported improvement of survival outcomes after the addition of TCZ to their SOC regime, with 11 of 23 patients (47.8%) admitted prior to March 13th dying compared to 2 of 62 (3.2%) admitted afterwards.
They also reported a reduced progression to mechanical ventilation in the TCZ group.
However, this study also holds a significant limitation: the time delay between the two groups means that knowledge about how to treat the disease likely improved over this timeframe as well.
All the same, the results of these observational retrospective studies provide support for TCZ as a pharmaceutical of interest for follow-up in clinical trials. 

In addition to the retrospective observational studies, other analysis have utilized a retrospective case-control design to match pairs of patients with similar baseline characteristics, only one of whom received TCZ for COVID-19.
In one such study, TCZ was significantly associated with a reduced risk of progression to ICU admission or death [@doi:10.1016/j.medmal.2020.05.001].
This study examined only 20 patients treated with TCZ (all but one of the patients treated with TCZ in the hospital during the study period) and compared them to 25 patients receiving SOC.
For the combined primary endpoint of death and/or ICU admission, only 25% of patients receiving TCZ progressed to an endpoint compared to 72% in the SOC group (p = 0.002, presumably based on a chi-square test based on the information provided in the text). 
When the two endpoints were examined separately, progression to invasive medical ventilation remained significant (32% SOC compared to 0% TCZ, p = 0.006) but not for mortality (48% SOC compared to 25% TCZ, p = 0.066).
In contrast, a study that compared 96 patients treated with TCZ to 97 patients treated with SOC only in New York City found that differences in mortality did not differ between the two groups, but that this difference did become significant when intubated patients were excluded from the analysis [@doi:10.1093/qjmed/hcaa206].
Taken together, these findings suggest that future clinical trials of TCZ may want to include intubation as an endpoint.
However, these studies should be approached with caution, not only because of the small number of patients enrolled and the retrospective design, but also because they performed a large number of statistical tests and did not account for multiple hypothesis testing.
These last findings highlight the need to search for a balance between impairing a harmful immune response, such as the one generated during CRS and CSS, and preventing the worsening of the clinical picture of the patients by potential new viral infections.

Though data about TCZ for COVID-19 is still only just emerging, some meta-analyses and systematic reviews have investigated the available data.
One meta-analysis [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653] evaluated 19 studies published or released as preprints prior to July 1, 2020 and found that the overall trends supportive of the frequent conclusion that TCZ does improve survivorship, with a significant HR of 0.41.
This trend improved when they excluded studies that administered a steroid alongside TCZ, with a significant HR of 0.04.
They also found some evidence for reduced IMV or ICU admission, but only when excluding all studies except a small number reporting estimates that were adjusted for possible bias introduced by the challenges of stringency during the enrollment process.
A systematic analysis of nine case-control studies estimated a HR of 0.482, which was also significant [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.10.20150938]. 
Although these estimates are similar, it is important to note that they are drawing from the same literature and are therefore likely to be affected by the same biases in publication.
A second systematic review of studies investigating TCZ treatment for COVID-19 analyzed 31 studies that had been published or released as pre-prints and reported that none carried a low risk of bias (RoB) [@doi:10.1016/j.pulmoe.2020.07.003].
Therefore, the present evidence is not likely to be sufficient for conclusions about the efficacy of TCZ.

Additionally, there are possible risks associated with the administration of TCZ for COVID-19.
TCZ has been used for over a decade to treat rheumatoid arthritis [@doi:10.1177/1759720X18798462], and a recent study found the drug to be safe for pregnant and breastfeeding women [@doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kez100].
However, TCZ may increase the risk of developing infections [@doi:10.1177/1759720X18798462], and rheumatoid arthritis patients with chronic hepatitis B infections had a high risk of hepatitis B virus reactivation when TCZ was administered in combination with other RA drugs [@doi:10.1111/1756-185X.13010].
As a result, TCZ is contraindicated in patients with active infections such as tuberculosis [@doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3].
Previous studies have investigated, with varying results, a possible increased risk of infection in rheumatoid arthritis patients administered TCZ [@doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keq343; @doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-214367], although another study reported that the incidence rate of infections was higher in clinical practice rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with TCZ than in the rates reported by clinical trials [@doi:10.1093/rheumatology/ker223].
In the investigation of 544 Italian COVID-19 patients, the group treated with TCZ was found to be more likely to develop secondary infections, with 24% compared to 4% in the control group [@doi:10/d2pk].
Reactivation of hepatitis B and herpes simplex virus 1 was also reported in a small number of patients in this study, all of whom were receiving TCZ.
A July 2020 case report described negative outcomes of two COVID-19 patients after receiving TCZ, including one death; however, both patients were intubated and had entered septic shock prior to receiving TCZ [@doi:10.1016/j.chest.2020.04.024], likely indicating a severe level of cytokine production.
Additionally, D-dimer and sIL2R levels were reported by one study to increase in patients treated with TCZ, which raised concerns because of the potential association between elevated D-dimer levels and thrombosis and between sIL2R and diseases where T-cell regulation is compromised [@doi:10.1016/j.chest.2020.06.006]. 
An increased risk of bacterial infection was also identified in a systematic review of the literature, based on the unadjusted estimates reported [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653].
In summary, TCZ administration to COVID-19 patients is not without risks, may introduce additional risk of developing secondary infections, and should be approached especially cautiously for patients who have latent viral infections.

In summary, approximately 25% of coronavirus patients develop ARDS, which is caused by an excessive early response of the immune system which can be a component of cytokine release syndrome [@doi:10.1016/j.chest.2020.06.006] and cytokine storm syndrome [@doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3].
This overwhelming inflammation is triggered by IL-6.
TCZ is an inhibitor of IL-6 and therefore may be able to neutralize the inflammatory pathway that leads to the cytokine storm.
While the mechanism suggests TCZ may be beneficial for the treatment of COVID-19 patients experiencing excessive immune activity, no randomized controlled trials are available assessing its effect.
However, small initial studies have found preliminary indications that TCZ may reduce progression to invasive medical ventilation and/or death.
It should be noted that SOC varied widely across retrospective studies, with one study administering HCQ, lopinavir-ritonavir, antibiotics, and/or heparin as part of standard care.
Interest in TCZ as a treatment for COVID-19 was supported by two meta-analyses that converged on a HR estimate of approximately 0.45 [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.10.20150938; @doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653], but a third meta-analysis found that all of the available literature carries a risk of bias, with even the largest available TCZ studies to date carrying a moderate risk of bias under the ROBINS-I criteria [@doi:10.1016/j.pulmoe.2020.07.003].
Additionally, different studies used different dosages, number of doses, and methods of administration; ongoing research may be needed to optimize administration of TCZ [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104443], although similar results were reported by one study for intravenous and subcutaneous administration [@doi:10/d2pk].
Clinical trials that are in progress are likely to provide additional insight into the effectiveness of this drug for the treatment of COVID-19 along with how it should be administered.

###### Anakinra
**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Anakinra is a recombinant of IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) that blocks binding of IL-1α, or IL-1β to IL-1R1. Its main task is to reduce inflammation caused by IL-1-mediation, which finds a broad spectrum of applications, including acute stroke [@doi10.1136/jnnp.2004.054882], rheumatoid arthritis [@doi:10.3899/jrheum.090074], and several hereditary, systemic or local inflammatory diseases [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa055137, @doi:10.1186/s12969-017-0147-3, @doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.01157]. The application of Anakinra features a very safety profile, and has a very low rate of side effects and prolonged duration.

**Current Evidence.**

In two retrospective cohort studies, first at the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, Italy with 29 patients treated with high dosages of anakinra and 16 controls [@doi:10.1016/S2665-9913(20)30127-2], and second at Groupe Hospitalier Paris Saint-Joseph Paris, France, with 96 participants in France, among which 52 were treated with the drug and 44 were administered standard protocols, anakinra has proven to
progressively improve respiratory function, dicrease likelihood of application of invasive mechanical ventilation, and significantly reduce mortality [@doi:10.1016/S2665-9913(20)30164-8].


**Summary.**
Anakinra remains a promising treatment for patients with more severe forms of covid-19. On top of that, the drug is safe, not showing any signs of serious side effects.

#### Neutralizing Antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases.
They have become some of the best-selling drugs in the pharmaceutical market in recent years [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z].
There are currently 79 FDA approved mAbs on the market including antibodies for viral infections (e.g. Ibalizumab for HIV and Palivizumab for RSV) [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z; @doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095916].
Virus-specific neutralizing antibodies commonly target viral surface glycoproteins or host structures, thereby inhibiting viral entry through receptor binding interference [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02323; @doi:10.1080/21645515.2017.1337614].
This section discusses current efforts in developing neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 and how expertise gained from previous approaches for MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-1 may benefit antibody development.

##### Spike (S) Neutralizing Antibody

During the first SARS epidemic in 2002, nAbs were found in SARS-CoV-1-infected patients [@doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2004.01009.x;@doi:10.1086/423286].
Several studies following up on these findings identified various S-glycoprotein epitopes as the major targets of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-1 [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755].
The passive transfer of immune serum containing nAbs from SARS-CoV-1-infected mice resulted in protection of naïve mice from viral lower respiratory tract infection upon intranasal challenge [@doi:10.1128/jvi.78.7.3572-3577.2004].
Similarly, a meta-analysis suggested that administration of plasma from recovered SARS-CoV-1 patients reduced mortality upon SARS-CoV-1 infection [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiu396].
Similar results were observed in MERS-CoV infection during the second coronavirus-related epidemic of the 21st century.
In these cases, neutralizing antibodies were identified against various epitopes of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the S glycoprotein [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1402074111; @doi:10.1128/JVI.00912-14].
Coronaviruses use trimeric spike (S) glycoproteins on their surface to bind to host cell receptors, such as ACE2, allowing for cell entry [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058].
Each S glycoprotein protomer is comprised of an S1 domain, also called the RBD, and an S2 domain.
The S1 domain binds to host cell receptors while the S2 domain facilitates the fusion between the viral envelope and host cell membranes [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755].
Although targeting of the host cell receptor ACE2 shows efficacy in inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 infection [@doi:10.1038/nature02145], given the physiological relevance of ACE2 [@doi:10/bsbp49], it would be favorable to target virus-specific structures rather than host receptors.
This forms the rationale of developing neutralizing antibodies against the S glycoprotein, disrupting its interaction with ACE2 and other receptors and thereby inhibiting viral entry.

The first human neutralizing antibody against SARS-CoV-2 targeting the trimeric spike (S) glycoproteins was developed using hybridoma technology [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958], where antibody-producing B-cells developed by mice can be inserted into myeloma cells to produce a hybrid cell line (the hybridoma) that is grown in culture.
The 47D11 clone was able to cross-neutralize SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 by a mechanism that is different from receptor binding interference.
The exact mechanism of how this clone neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and inhibits infection _in vitro_ remains unknown, but a potential mechanism might be antibody-induced destabilization of the membrane prefusion structure [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.028].
The ability of this antibody to prevent infection at a feasible dose needs to be validated _in vivo_, especially since _in vitro_ neutralization effects have been shown to not be reflective of _in vivo_ efficacy [@doi:10.1128/JVI.01603-17].
Only a week later, a different group successfully isolated multiple nAbs targeting the RBD of the S glycoprotein from blood samples taken from COVID-19 patients in China [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.990770].
Interestingly, the patient-isolated antibodies did not cross-react with RBDs from SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, although cross-reactivity to the trimeric spike proteins of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV was observed.
This finding suggests that the RBDs between the three coronavirus species are immunologically distinct and that the isolated nAbs targeting the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 are species specific.
While this specificity is desirable, it also raises the question of whether these antibodies are more susceptible to viral escape mechanisms.
Viral escape is a common resistance mechanism to nAb therapy due to selective pressure from neutralizing antibodies [@doi:10.2217/imt.15.33; @doi:10.1126/science.1213256].
For HIV, broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) targeting the CD4 binding site (CD4bs) show greater neutralization breadth than monoclonal antibodies, which target only specific HIV strains [@doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2019.01.007].
For MERS-CoV, a combination of multiple neutralizing antibodies targeting different antigenic sites prevented neutralization escape [@doi:10.1128/JVI.02002-17].
It was found that the different antibody isolates did not target the same epitopes, suggesting that using them in combination might produce a synergistic effect that prevents viral escape [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.990770].
It was also demonstrated that binding affinity of the antibodies does not reflect their capability to compete with ACE2 binding.
Furthermore, no conclusions about correlations between the severity of disease and the ability to produce neutralizing antibodies can be drawn at this point.
Rather, higher neutralizing antibody titers were more frequently found in patients with severe disease.
Correspondingly, higher levels of anti-spike IgG were observed in patients that deceased from infection compared to patient that recovered [@doi:10.1172/jci.insight.123158].

Results from the SARS and MERS epidemics thus provide valuable lessons for the design of neutralizing antibodies for the current outbreak.
The findings for SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV can aid in identifying which structures constitute suitable targets for nAbs, despite the fact that the RBD appears to be distinct between the three coronavirus species.
These studies also suggest that a combination of nAbs targeting distinct antigens might be necessary to provide protection [@doi:10.1128/JVI.02002-17].
The biggest challenge remains identifying antibodies that not only bind to their target, but also prove to be beneficial for disease management.
On that note, a recently published study indicates that anti-spike antibodies could make the disease worse rather than eliminating the virus [@doi:10.1172/jci.insight.123158].
These findings underscores our current lack of understanding the full immune response to SARS-CoV-2.

#### Interferons

IFNs are a family of cytokines critical to activating the innate immune system response against viral infections.
Interferons are classified into three categories based on their receptor specificity: types I, II and III [@doi:10.1128/mmbr.05015-11].
Specifically, IFNs I (IFN-𝛼 and 𝛽) and II (IFN-𝛾) induce the expression of antiviral proteins that bring the viral RNA to degradation [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2003.11.013].
Among these IFNs, IFN-𝛽 has already been found to strongly inhibit the replication of other coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-1, in cell culture, while IFN-𝛼 and 𝛾 were shown to be less effective in this context [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2003.11.013].
There is evidence that patients with higher susceptibility to ARDS indeed show deficiency in IFN-𝛽.
For instance, infection with other coronaviruses impairs IFN-𝛽 expression and synthesis, allowing the virus to escape the innate immune response [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.024].
On March 18 2020, Synairgen plc received approval to start a phase II trial for SNG001, an IFN-𝛽-1a formulation to be delivered to the lungs via inhalation.
SNG001 was already shown to be effective in reducing viral load in an _in vivo_ model of swine flu and _in vitro_ models of other coronavirus infections [@synairgen-SNG001].
In July, a press release from Synairgen stated that SNG001 reduced progression to ventilation in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center study of 101 patients with an average age in the late 50s [@url:https://www.synairgen.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/200720-Synairgen-announces-positive-results-from-trial-of-SNG001-in-hospitalised-COVID-19-patients.pdf].
They also reported that patients in the treatment group showed greater recovery and lower breathlessness.
However, given that this information was released in a press release rather than in a manuscript and thus cannot be thoroughly reviewed, these findings should be considered preliminary.
Additionally, the WHO Solidarity trial reported no significant effect of IFN-𝛽1a on patient survival during hospitalization [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184].

#### Vaccines

##### Vaccine Development

Flu-like illnesses caused by viruses are a common target of vaccine development programs, and influenza vaccine technology in particular has made many strides.
During the H1N1 influenza outbreak, vaccine development was accelerated because of the existing infrastructure, along with the fact that regulatory agencies had already decided that vaccines produced using egg- and cell-based platforms could be licensed under the regulations used for a strain change.
Critiques of the production and distribution of the H1N1 vaccine have stressed the need for alternative development-and-manufacturing platforms that can be readily adapted to new pathogens.
Although a monovalent H1N1 vaccine was not available before the pandemic peaked in the United States and Europe, it was available soon afterward as a stand-alone vaccine that was eventually incorporated into commercially available seasonal influenza vaccines [@doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005630].
If H1N1 vaccine development provides any indication, considering developing and manufacturing platforms for promising COVID-19 vaccine trials early could hasten the emergence of an effective prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.

The first critical step towards developing a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 was characterizing the target, which fortunately happened early in the COVID-19 outbreak with the sequencing and dissemination of the viral genome [@url:https://www.who.int/csr/don/12-january-2020-novel-coronavirus-china/en/].
The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) is coordinating global health agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.
As of September 2020, there were over 180 vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2 in development [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2798-3].
Unlike many global vaccine development programs previously, such as with H1N1, the vaccine development landscape for COVID-19 includes vaccines produced by a wide array of technologies.
Experience in the field of oncology is encouraging COVID-19 vaccine developers to use next-generation approaches to vaccine development, which have led to the great diversity of vaccine development programs [@url:https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/newer-vaccine-technologies-deployed-to-develop-covid-19-shot-67152].
These diverse technology platforms include DNA, RNA, virus-like particle, recombinant protein, both replicating and non-replicating viral vectors, live attenuated virus, and inactivated virus approaches (Figure @fig:vaccines).
Given the wide range of vaccines under development, it is possible that some vaccine products may eventually be shown to be more effective in certain subpopulations, such as children, pregnant women, immunocompromised patients, the elderly, etc.
The requirements for a successful vaccine trial and deployment are complex and may require coordination between government, industry, academia, and philanthropic entities [@doi:10.1126/science.abc5312].
While little is currently known about immunity to SARS-CoV-2, vaccine development typically tests for serum neutralizing activity, as this has been established as a biomarker for adaptive immunity in other respiratory illnesses [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2022483].

![
**Vaccine Development Strategies.**
Several different strategies can and are being employed for the development of vaccines.
Each approach capitalizes on different features of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and delivery through a different platform.
](images/N002-Vaccines.png){#fig:vaccines secno=1}

###### DNA Vaccines

This vaccination method involves the direct introduction of a plasmid containing a DNA sequence encoding the antigen(s) against which an immune response is sought into appropriate tissues [@url:https://www.who.int/biologicals/areas/vaccines/dna/en/].
This approach may offer several advantages over traditional vaccination approaches, such as the stimulation of both B- as well as T-cell responses and the absence of any infectious agent.
Currently, a Phase I safety and immunogenicity clinical trial of INO-4800, a prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, is underway [@clinicaltrials:NCT04336410].
The vaccine developer Inovio Pharmaceuticals Technology is overseeing administration of INO-4800 by intradermal injection followed by electroporation with the CELLECTRA® device to healthy volunteers.
Electroporation is the application of brief electric pulses to tissues in order to permeabilize cell membranes in a transient and reversible manner.
It has been shown that electroporation can enhance vaccine efficacy by up to 100-fold, as measured by increases in antigen-specific antibody titers [@doi:10.1016/j.coi.2011.03.008].
The safety of the CELLECTRA® device has been studied for over seven years, and these studies support the further development of electroporation as a safe vaccine delivery method [@doi:10.4161/hv.24702].
The temporary formation of pores through electroporation facilitates the successful transportation of macromolecules into cells, allowing cells to robustly take up INO-4800 for the production of an antibody response.
Approved by the U.S. FDA on April 6, 2020, the Phase I study is enrolling up to 40 healthy adult volunteers in Philadelphia, PA at the Perelman School of Medicine and at the Center for Pharmaceutical Research in Kansas City, MO.
The trial has two experimental arms corresponding to the two locations.
Participants in Experimental Group 1 will receive one intradermal injection of 1.0 milligram (mg) of INO-4800 followed by electroporation using the CELLECTRA® 2000 device twice, administered at Day 0 and Week 4.
Participants in Experimental Group 2 will receive two intradermal injections of 1.0 mg (total 2.0 mg per dosing visit) of INO-4800 followed by electroporation using the CELLECTRA® 2000 device, administered at Day 0 and Week 4.
Safety data and the initial immune responses of participants from the trial are expected by the end of the summer of 2021.
The development of a DNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 by Inovio could be an important step forward in the world's search for a COVID-19 vaccine.
Although exciting, the cost of vaccine manufacturing and electroporation may make scaling the use of this technology for prophylactic use for the general public difficult.

###### RNA Vaccines

RNA vaccines are nucleic-acid based modalities that code for viral antigens against which the human body elicits a humoral and cellular immune response.
The mRNA technology is transcribed _in vitro_ and delivered to cells via lipid nanoparticles (LNP) [@doi:10.1002/eji.1830230749].
They are recognized by ribosomes _in vivo_ and then translated and modified into functional proteins [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
The resulting intracellular viral proteins are displayed on surface MHC proteins, provoking a strong CD8+ T cell response as well as a CD4+ T cell and B cell-associated antibody responses [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
Naturally, mRNA is not very stable and can degrade quickly in the extracellular environment or the cytoplasm.
The LNP covering protects the mRNA from enzymatic degradation outside of the cell [@doi:10.4155/tde-2016-0006].
Codon optimization to prevent secondary structure formation and modifications of the poly-A tail as well as the 5’ untranslated region to promote ribosomal complex binding can increase mRNA expression in cells.
Furthermore, purifying out dsRNA and immature RNA with FPLC (fast performance liquid chromatography) and HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography) technology will improve translation of the mRNA in the cell [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594; @doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].
Vaccines based on mRNA delivery confer many advantages over traditional viral vectored vaccines and DNA vaccines.
In comparison to live attenuated viruses, mRNA vaccines are non-infectious and can be synthetically produced in an egg-free, cell-free environment, thereby reducing the risk of a detrimental immune response in the host [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.03.007].
Unlike DNA vaccines, mRNA technologies are naturally degradable and non-integrating, and they do not need to cross the nuclear membrane in addition to the plasma membrane for their effects to be seen [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
Furthermore, mRNA vaccines are easily, affordably, and rapidly scalable.

Although mRNA vaccines have been developed for therapeutic and prophylactic purposes, none have previously been licensed or commercialized.
Nevertheless, they have shown promise in animal models and preliminary clinical trials for several indications, including rabies, coronavirus, influenza, and cytomegalovirus [@clinicaltrials:NCT01669096].
Preclinical data previously identified effective antibody generation against full-length FPLC-purified influenza hemagglutinin stalk-encoding mRNA in mice, rabbits, and ferrets [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05482-0].
Similar immunological responses for mRNA vaccines were observed in humans in Phase I and II clinical trials operated by the pharmaceutical-development companies Curevac and Moderna for rabies, flu, and zika [@doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].
Positively charged bilayer LNPs carrying the mRNA attract negatively charged cell membranes, endocytose into the cytoplasm [@doi:10.4155/tde-2016-0006], and facilitate endosomal escape.
LNPs can be coated with modalities recognized and engulfed by specific cell types.
LNPs that are 150nm or less effectively enter into lymphatic vessels.

There are three types of RNA vaccines: non-replicating, _in vivo_ self-replicating, and _in vitro_ dendritic cell non-replicating [@url:https://www.phgfoundation.org/briefing/rna-vaccines].
Non-replicating mRNA vaccines consist of a simple open reading frame (ORF) for the viral antigen flanked by the 5’ UTR and 3’ poly-A tail.
_In vivo_ self-replicating vaccines encode a modified viral genome derived from single-stranded, positive sense RNA alphaviruses [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594; @doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].
The RNA genome encodes the viral antigen along with proteins of the genome replication machinery, including an RNA polymerase.
Structural proteins required for viral assembly are not included in the engineered genome [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
Self-replicating vaccines produce more viral antigens over a longer period of time, thereby evoking a more robust immune response [@url:https://www.phgfoundation.org/briefing/rna-vaccines].
Finally, _in vitro_ dendritic cell non-replicating RNA vaccines limit transfection to dendritic cells.
Dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting immune cells that easily take up mRNA and present fragments of the translated peptide on their MHC proteins, which can then interact with T cell receptors.
Ultimately, primed T follicular helper cells can stimulate germinal center B cells that also present the viral antigen to produce antibodies against the virus [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.10.004].
These cells are isolated from the patient, grown and transfected _ex vivo_, and reintroduced to the patient [@doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.243].

mRNA-1273 was the first COVID-19 vaccine to enter a phase I clinical in the United States.
ModernaTX, Inc. is currently spearheading an investigation on the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of mRNA-1273, a conventional lipid nanoparticle encapsulated RNA encoding a full-length prefusion stabilized spike (S) protein for SARS-CoV-2 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04283461].
In a study that is ongoing, forty-five participants were enrolled and given intramuscular injections of mRNA-1273 in their deltoid muscle on day 1 and day 29, and then followed for the next twelve months.
Healthy males and non-pregnant females aged 18-55 years were recruited for this study and divided into three groups receiving 25, 100, or 250 micrograms (&mu;g) of mRNA-1273.
IgG ELISA assays on patient serology samples are being used to examine the immunogenicity of the vaccine [@clinicaltrials:NCT04283461].

A preliminary report describing initial safety and immunogenicity findings is now available [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2022483].
Binding antibodies were observed at two weeks after the first dose at all concentrations.
At the time point one week after the second dose was administered on day 29, the pseudotyped lentivirus reporter single-round-of-infection neutralization assay (PsVNA), which was used to assess neutralizing activity, reached a median level similar to the median observed in convalescent plasma samples.
Participants reported mild and moderate systemic adverse events after the day 1 injection, and one severe local event was observed in each of the two highest dose levels.
The second injection led to severe systemic adverse events for three of the participants at the highest dose levels, with one participant in the group being evaluated at an urgent care center on the day after the second dose.
The reported localized adverse events from the second dose were similar to those from the first.

In summary, mRNA vaccines are promising tools in the prevention and control of pandemics because they may sidestep many challenges associated with traditional vaccine design and manufacturing.
<!-- mRNA-1273 is the only RNA vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 for which preliminary results are available. -->
As of August 2020, placebo-blinded and randomized results for mRNA vaccines are not yet available, but the initial results are promising.
In the dose ranging study, even the lowest dose of 25 &mu;g of mRNA-1273 appeared to be sufficient to induce an immunogenicity profile comparable to that observed in convalescent plasma and appeared to be well tolerated among the population of healthy, non-pregnant participants from 18-55 years of age.
Based on the preliminary results from mRNA-1273 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2022483], a new trial aims to enroll 30,000 participants who will be randomized for two injections of 100 &mu;g of mRNA-1273 or placebo, again spaced 28 days apart [@clinicaltrials:NCT04470427].

##### Adjuvants for Vaccines

Adjuvants include a variety of molecules or larger microbial-related products that have an effect on the immune system or an immune response of interest.
They can either be comprised of or contain immunostimulants or immunomodulators.
Adjuvants are sometimes included within vaccines, especially vaccines other than live-attenuated and inactivated viruses, in order to enhance the immune response.
A review on the development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines [@doi:10.3390/vaccines8020153] also included a brief summary of the potential of adjuvants for these vaccines, including a brief description of some already commonly used adjuvants.
Different adjuvants can regulate different types of immune responses, so the type or combination of adjuvants used in a vaccine will depend on both the type of vaccine and concern related to efficacy and safety.
A variety of possible mechanisms for adjuvants have been researched [@doi:10.1038/nri2510; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.02619; @doi:10.3390/vaccines8010128], including the following: induction of DAMPs that can be recognized by certain PRRs of the innate immune system; functioning as PAMP that can also be recognized by certain PRRs; and more generally enhancing the humoral or cellular immune responses.
Selection of one or more adjuvants requires considering how to promote the advantageous effects of the components and/or immune response and, likewise, to inhibit possible deleterious effects.
There are also considerations related to the method of delivering (or co-delivering) the adjuvant and antigen components of a vaccine.

##### Trained Immunity

Another approach that is being investigated explores the potential for vaccines that are not made from the SARS-CoV-2 virus to confer what has been termed trained immunity. 
In a recent review [@doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0285-6], trained immunity was defined as forms of memory that are temporary (e.g., months or years) and reversible. 
It is induced by exposure to whole-microorganism vaccines or other microbial stimuli that generates heterologous protective effects.
Trained immunity can be displayed by innate immune cells or innate immune features of other cells, and it is characterized by alterations to immune responsiveness to future immune challenges due to epigenetic and metabolic mechanisms.
These alterations can take the form of either an increased or decreased response to immune challenge by a pathogen.
Trained immunity elicited by non-SARS-CoV-2 whole-microorganism vaccines could potentially improve SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility or severity [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042].

One type of stimulus which research indicates can induce trained immunity is bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccination.
BCG is an attenuated form of bacteria _Mycobacterium bovis_.
The vaccine is most commonly administered for the prevention of tuberculosis in humans.
Clinical trials in non-SARS-CoV-2-infected adults have been designed to assess whether BCG vaccination could have prophylactic effects against SARS-CoV-2 by reducing susceptibility, preventing infection, or reducing disease severity. 
A number of trials are now evaluating the effects of the BCG vaccine or the related vaccine VPM1002 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @clinicaltrials:NCT04327206; @clinicaltrials:NCT04328441; @clinicaltrials:NCT04348370; @clinicaltrials:NCT04350931; @clinicaltrials:NCT04362124; @clinicaltrials:NCT04369794; @clinicaltrials:NCT04373291; @clinicaltrials:NCT04379336; @clinicaltrials:NCT04384549; @clinicaltrials:NCT04387409; @clinicaltrials:NCT04414267; @clinicaltrials:NCT04417335; @clinicaltrials:NCT04435379; @clinicaltrials:NCT04439045].

The ongoing trials are using a number of different approaches.
Some trials enroll healthcare workers, other trials hospitalized elderly adults without immunosuppression who get vaccinated with placebo or BCG at hospital discharge, and yet another set of trials older adults (>50 years) under chronic care for conditions like hypertension and diabetes.
One set of trials, for example, uses time until first infection as the primary study endpoint; more generally, outcomes measured in some of these trials are related to incidence of disease and disease severity or symptoms.
Some analyses have suggested a possible correlation at the country level between the frequency of BCG vaccination (or BCG vaccination policies) and the severity of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042].
Currently it is unclear whether this correlation has any connection to trained immunity.
Many possible confounding factors are also likely to vary among countries, such as age distribution, detection efficiency, stochastic epidemic dynamic effects, differences in healthcare capacity over time in relation to epidemic dynamics, and these have not been adequately accounted for in current analyses. <!-- TO DO: add in study that debunks this-->
It is unclear whether there is an effect of the timing of BCG vaccination, both during an individual's life cycle and relative to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additionally, given that severe SARS-CoV-2 may be associated with a dysregulated immune response, it is unclear what alterations to the immune response would be most likely to be protective versus pathogenic (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]).
The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] proposes that trained immunity might lead to an earlier and stronger response, which could in turn reduce viremia and the risk of later, detrimental immunopathology.
While trained immunity is an interesting possible avenue to complement vaccine development efforts through the use of an existing vaccine, additional research is required to assess whether the BCG vaccine is likely to confer trained immunity in the case of SARS-CoV-2.

### Discussion

With the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the development and/or identification of therapeutic and prophylactic interventions became an issue of international urgency.
In previous outbreaks of HCoV, namely SARS and MERS, the development of these interventions was very limited.
As research has progressed, several potential approaches to treatment have emerged (Figure @fig:therapeutics)..
Most notably, remdesivir has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of COVID-19, and dexamethasone, which was approved by the FDA in 1958, has been found to improve outcomes for patients with severe COVID-19.
Other potential therapies are being still being explored and require additional data (Figure @fig:ebm-trials).
Additionally, major advances in vaccines using mRNA and adenoviruses that have led to three vaccines becoming available or close to becoming available in late 2020 (Figure @fig:therapeutics). <!-- Update depending on where this goes and specify countries etc.-->
As more evidence becomes available, the potential for existing and novel therapies to improve outcomes for COVID-19 patients will become better understood.

![
**Mechanism of Action for Potential Therapeutics**
Potential therapeutics currently being studied target the SARS-CoV-2 or modify the host environment through many different mechanisms.
Here, the relationship between the virus and several therapeutics described above are visualized.
](images/N001-LifeCyclePlusDrugs.png){#fig:therapeutics secno=1}

Insights into the pathogenesis and immune response to SARS-CoV-2 have also provided some insights into prophylactics [cite therapeutics].
Though some concerns remain about the duration of sustained immunity for convalescents, vaccine development efforts are ongoing and show initial promising results.
<!-- TO DO: Needs to be updated with vaccine info about duration, this is changing rapidly so leaving for now-->
The Moderna trial, for example, reported that the neutralizing activity in participants who received two doses of the vaccine was similar to that observed in convalescent plasma.
Insights from the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 have also guided the identification of potential therapeutics.
As cases have become better characterized, it has become evident that many patients experience an initial immune response to the virus that is typically characterized by fever, cough, dyspnea, and related symptoms.
However, the most serious concern is cytokine release syndrome, when the body's immune response becomes dysregulated, resulting in an extreme inflammatory response.
The RECOVERY trial, a large-scale, multi-arm trial enrolling about 15% of all COVID-19 patients in the United Kingdom, was the first to identify that the widely available steroid dexamethasone seems to be beneficial for patients suffering from this immune dysregulation [@doi:10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273].
The results of efforts to identify therapeutic treatments to treat patients early in the course of infection have been more ambiguous.
Early interest in the drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine yielded no promising results from studies with robust experimental designs.
On the other hand, the experimental drug remdesivir, which was developed for Ebola, has received enough support from early analyses to receive FDA approval, but results have been mixed.
The potential for other drugs, such as tocilizumab, to reduce recovery time remains unclear, but some early results were promising.

One concern is that the presentation of COVID-19 appears to be heterogeneous across the lifespan.
Many adult cases, especially in younger adults, present with mild symptoms or even asymptomatically, while others, especially in older adults, can be severe or fatal.
In children, the SARS-CoV-2 virus can present as two distinct diseases, COVID-19 or MIS-C.
The therapeutics and prophylactics discussed here were all tested in adults.
One of the two mRNA vaccines, Pfizer and BioNTech's BNT162b2, has been issued an EUA for patients as young as 16 [@url:https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-and-biontech-submit-emergency-use-authorization], while ModernaTX has begun a clinical trial to assess its mRNA vaccine in adolescents ages 12 to 18 [@url:https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/moderna-announces-first-participants-dosed-phase-23-study-covid].
However, additional research is needed to identify therapeutics that address the symptoms characteristic of pediatric COVID-19 and MIS-C cases.

#### Potential Avenues of Interest for Therapeutic Development

Given what is currently known about these therapeutics for COVID-19, a number of related therapies beyond those explored above may also prove to be of interest.
For example, the demonstrated benefit of dexamethasone and the ongoing potential of tocilizumab for treatment of COVID-19 suggests that other anti-inflammatory agents might also hold value for the treatment of COVID-19.
Given that current evidence about treating COVID-19 with dexamethasone suggests that the need to curtail the cytokine storm inflammatory response to the virus can transcend the risks of immunosuppression, exploration of more anti-inflammatory agents may be warranted.
While dexamethasone is considered widely available and generally affordable, the high costs of biologics such as tocilizumab therapy may present obstacles to wide-scale distribution of this drug if it proves of value.
At the doses used for rheumatoid arthritis patients, the cost for tocilizumab ranges from $179.20 to $896 per dose for the IV form and $355 for the pre-filled syringe [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349513/table/T43/].
There are several anti-inflammatory agents used for the treatment of autoimmune diseases that may also be able to counter the effects of the cytokine storm induced by the virus, some of which, such as cyclosporine, are likely to be more cost-effective and readily available than biologics [@url:https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/meyers_pp/385].
While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-alpha.
Inhibition of TNF-alpha by an inhibitor such as Etanercept has been previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV-1 [@doi:10.1185/030079903125002757] and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well.
Another anti-IL-6 antibody, sarilumab, is also being investigated [@url:http://www.news.sanofi.us/2020-03-16-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-begin-global-Kevzara-R-sarilumab-clinical-trial-program-in-patients-with-severe-COVID-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04327388].
Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the Janus-activated kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10/dph5].
Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10/ggnrsx].
Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04320277].
Identification and targeting of further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.

In addition to immunosuppressive treatments that are most beneficial late in disease progression, much research is focused on identifying treatments would be likely to benefit early-stage patients.
For example, although studies of hydroxychloroquine have not supported the early theory-driven interest in this antiviral treatment, alternative compounds with related mechanisms may still have potential.
Hydroxyferroquine derivatives of HCQ have been described as a class of bioorganometallic compounds that exert antiviral effects with some selectivity for SARS-CoV-1 _in vitro_ [@doi:10.1021/jm0601856].
Future work could explore whether such compounds exert antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2 and whether they would be safer for use in COVID-19.
Another potential approach is the development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted to SARS-CoV-2.
Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet been approved for human coronaviruses.
Intriguing new options are emerging, however.
Beta-D-N4-hydroxycytidine (NHC) is an orally bioavailable ribonucleotide analog showing broad-spectrum activity against RNA viruses, which may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ in mouse models of HCoVs [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abb5883].
A range of other antivirals are also in development.
Development of antivirals will be further facilitated as research reveals more information about the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell and host cell genome, mechanisms of viral replication, mechanisms of viral assembly, and mechanisms of viral release to other cells; this can allow researchers to target specific stages and structures of the viral life cycle.
Finally, antibodies against viruses, also known as antiviral monoclonal antibodies, could be an alternative as well and are described in detail in an above section.
The goal of antiviral antibodies is to neutralize viruses through either cell-killing activity or blocking of viral replication [@doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.005].
They may also engage the host immune response, encouraging the immune system to hone in on the virus.
Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.
Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

Some research is also investigating potential therapeutics and prophylactics that would interact with components of the innate immune response.
For example, there are a variety of TLRs, PRRs that recognize PAMPs and DAMPs.
TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses [@ISBN:9780815332183].
In mouse models, poly(I:C) and CpG, which are agonists of toll-like receptors TLR3 and TLR9, respectively, showed protective effects when administered prior to SARS-CoV-1 infection [@doi:10.1128/JVI.01410-12].
Therefore, TLR agonists hold some potential for broad-spectrum prophylaxis.

Given that a large number of clinical trials are currently in progress, more information about the potential of these and other therapeutics should become available over time.
This information, combined with advances in understanding the molecular structure and viral pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, may lead to a more complete understanding of how the virus affects the human host and what strategies can improve outcomes.
To date, investigations of potential therapeutics for COVID-19 have focused primarily on repurposing existing drugs.
This approach is necessary given the urgency of the situation as well as the extensive time required for developing and testing new therapies.
However, in the long-term, new drugs specific for treatment of COVID-19 may also enter development.
Development of novel drugs is likely to be guided by what is known about the pathogenesis and molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2.
For example, understanding the various structural components of SARS-CoV-2 may allow for the development of small molecule inhibitors of those components.
Currently, crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease have recently been resolved [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y; @url:https://www.diamond.ac.uk/covid-19/for-scientists/Main-protease-structure-and-XChem.html], and efforts are already in place to perform screens for small molecule inhibitors of the main protease, which have yielded potential hits [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y].
Much work remains to be done to determine further crystal structures of other viral components, understand the relative utility of targeting different viral components, perform additional small molecule inhibitor screens, and determine the safety and efficacy of the potential inhibitors.
While still nascent, work in this area is promising.
Over the longer term, this approach and others may lead to the development of novel therapeutics specifically for COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2.

#### Conclusions of the Present Analysis

Due to the large number of clinical trials currently under examination (Figure @fig:ebm-trials), not all candidates are examined here.
Instead, this review seeks to provide an overview of the range of mechanisms that have been explored and to examine some prominent candidates in the context of the pathogenesis of and immune response to SARS-CoV-2.
As more research becomes available, this review will be updated to include additional therapeutics that emerge and to include new findings that are released about those discussed here.
While no therapeutics or vaccines were developed for SARS-CoV-1 or MERS-CoV, the current state of COVID-19 research suggests that the body of literature produced before and after the emergence of these viruses has prepared the biomedical community for a rapid response to novel HCoV like SARS-CoV-2.
At present, two pharmaceutical therapeutics and one vaccine have been authorized for the treatment and prevention, respectively, of COVID-19.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be a topic of significant worldwide concern, more information is expected to become available about pharmaceutical mechanisms that can be used to combat this, and possibly other, HCoV.
These advances therefore not only benefit the international community's ability to respond to the current crisis, but are also likely to shape responses to future viral threats.
