## Therapeutics and Prophylactics

Given the observed and predicted spread of COVID-19, the development of interventions will be critical to mitigating its effect on health and the mortality rate.
Such interventions fall into two categories: therapeutics, which are meant to treat an already existing disease, and prophylactics, which are meant to prevent a disease from occurring.
For infectious diseases such as COVID-19, the main prophylactics are vaccines; several types of vaccines are currently under development, as detailed below.
While vaccines would be expected to save the largest number of lives by bolstering the immune response of the at-risk population broadly to the virus, which would result in a lower rate of infection, the vaccine development process is long, and they fail to provide immediate prophylactic protection or treat ongoing infections [@doi:10.3390/v10120680].
This means that there is also an immediate need for treatments that palliate symptoms to avoid the most severe outcomes from infection.
Therapeutics can generally either be considered for the treatment and reduction of symptoms --- to reduce the severity and risks associated with an active infection --- or as a more direct way of targeting the virus ("antivirals") --- to inhibit the development of the virus once an individual is infected.
In the context of COVID-19, there is uncertainty surrounding the exact mechanism of action, as most therapies have secondary or off-target effects.
Thus, for this section, we will classify both therapeutics and prophylactics according to their biological properties, specifically whether they are biologics (produced from components of organisms) or small molecules.
Biologics include antibodies, interferons, and vaccines, while small molecules include drugs targeted at viral particles, drugs targeted at host proteins, and broad-based pharmaceuticals.
Broad-based pharmaceuticals include the much-discussed drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine.
We also describe nutraceuticals, which are dietary supplement interventions that may prime an individual's immune system to lessen the impact of RNA virus infections [@doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2020.02.007; @doi:10/ggkd3b].
In the following sections, we critically appraise the literature and clinical trials (Figure @fig:ebm-trials) surrounding the repurposing of existing treatments and development of novel approaches for the prevention, mitigation, and treatment of coronavirus infections.

![
**COVID-19 clinical trials.**
There are {{ebm_trials}} COVID-19 clinical trials and {{ebm_trials_results}} trials with results as of {{ebm_date_pretty}}.
The recruitment statuses and trial phases are shown only for trials in which the status or phase is recorded.
The study types include only types used in at least five trials.
The common interventions are all interventions used in at least ten trials.
Combinations of interventions, such as Hydroxychloroquine + Azithromycin, are tallied separately from the individual interventions.
Trials data are from the University of Oxford Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab's COVID-19 TrialsTracker [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3732709].
]({{ebm_trials_figure}} "COVID-19 clinical trials"){#fig:ebm-trials secno=1}


### Treatment of Symptoms

<!--
I think it's OK to leave in a section like this to explain what this means.
It's different from eg palliative care in cancer.
We can make sure it fits better into the rest of the section.
-->

The clinical picture of SARS-CoV-2 infection differs dramatically between individuals.
Some are asymptomatic, and many experience mild COVID-19 symptoms.
Mild symptoms commonly include fever and respiratory symptoms such as cough and sore throat, and, less commonly, gastrointestinal symptoms such as loss of appetite and vomiting [@doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000000664]; some patients experience a combination of respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms.
The most severe cases of COVID-19 include severe complications such as pneumonia and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), which can lead to respiratory failure and death [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.html].
Thus, specific drugs may be considered to alleviate these severe symptoms and reduce the risk of death.

<!--
Should include other emerging symptoms like cardiac complications, blood clots, etc.
-->

### Small Molecule Drugs

#### Small Molecule Drugs for Targeting SARS-CoV-2

The replication cycle of a virus within an epithelial host cell includes six basic steps that can be summarized as follows: i) attachment of the virus to the host cell; ii) penetration by endocytosis; iii) uncoating, classically defined as the release of viral contents into the host cell; iv) biosynthesis, during which the viral genetic material enters the nucleus where it gets replicated; v) assembly, where viral proteins are translated and new viral particles are assembled; vi) release, when the new viruses are released into the extracellular environment [@isbn:978-1405136457].
Antiviral drugs do not kill the virus, rather they inhibit its amplification by impairing one of these steps.
Nowadays, many of these drugs act during the biosynthesis step in order to inhibit the replication of viral genetic material.
Importantly, SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus.
In contrast to DNA viruses, which can use the host enzymes to propagate themselves, RNA viruses depends on their own polymerase, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), for replication [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7; @doi:10.1002/jmv.25761].
As noted above, even if a drug is meant to target the virus, it can also impact other processes in the host.

##### Nucleoside and Nucleotide Analogs

###### Favipiravir

Favipiravir (Avigan) was discovered by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. [@url:https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB12466].
The drug was found to effective at blocking viral amplification in several Influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses, such as Flaviviridae and Picornaviridae, through a reduction in plaque formation [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002] and viral replication in MDCK cells [@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06].
Furthermore, inoculation of mice with favipiravir was shown to increase survivability.
In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan for the treatment of patients infected with influenza that was resistant to conventional treatments like neuraminidase inhibitors [@doi:10.2183/pjab.93.027].

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA polymerase in a dose-dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including Influenza virus [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01074-08; @doi:10.1128/AAC.00356-07; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].
Nucleotide/side are the natural building blocks for RNA synthesis.
Because of this, modifications to these nucleotides/sides can disrupt key processes including replication [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.04.004].
Biochemical experiments showed that favipiravir was recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template.
A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].
Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced with the addition of Favipiravir in early times post-infection [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].

**Current Evidence.**
The effectiveness of favipiravir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under investigation.
An open-label, nonrandomized, before-after controlled study was recently conducted [@doi:10.1016/j.eng.2020.03.007].
The study included 80 COVID-19 patients (35 treated with favipiravir, 45 control) from the isolation ward of the National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases (The Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China.
The patients in the control group were treated with other antivirals, such as lopinavir and ritonavir.
Treatment was applied on days 2-14; treatment stopped either when viral clearance was confirmed or at day 14.
The efficacy of the treatment was measured by 1) the time until viral clearance using Kaplan-Meier survival curves, and 2) the improvement rate of chest computed tomography (CT) scans on day 14 after treatment.
The study found that favipiravir increased the speed of recovery (measured as viral clearance from the patient by RT-PCR) to 4 days compared to 11 days using other antivirals such as lopinavir and ritonavir.
Additionally, the lung CT scans of patients treated with favipiravir showed significantly higher improvement rates (91%) on day 14 compared to control patients (62%).
However, there were adverse side effects in 4 (11%) favipiravir-treated patients and 25 (56%) control patients.
The adverse side effects included: diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash, and liver and kidney injury.
Overall, despite the study reporting clinical improvement in favipiravir-treated patients, due to some issues with study design, it cannot be determined whether treatment with favipiravir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of any treatment.
For example, although there were significant differences between the two treatment groups, follow-up analysis is necessary due to the small sample size.
The selection of patients did not take into consideration important factors such as previous clinical conditions or sex, and there was no age categorization.
The study was not randomized or blinded, and the baseline control group was another antiviral instead of a placebo.
Therefore, randomized controlled trials are still required.

###### Remdesivir

Remdesivir (GS-5734) was developed by Gilead Sciences to treat Ebola Virus Disease.
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, it did not have any have any FDA-approved use.
However, on May 1, 2020, the FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/137564/download].
The EUA was based on information from two clinical trials, NCT04280705 and NCT04292899 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04292899; @clinicaltrials:NCT04280705; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007016].

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Remdesivir is metabolized to GS-441524, an adenosine analog that inhibits a broad range of polymerases and then evades exonuclease repair, causing chain termination [@doi:10.1074/jbc.AC120.013056; @doi:10.1128/mBio.00221-18; @doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0].
Although it was developed against Ebola, it also inhibits polymerase and replication of the coronaviruses MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV in cell culture assays with submicromolar IC50s [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3653].
It also inhibits SARS-CoV-2, showing synergy with chloroquine _in vitro_ [@doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0].

**Current Evidence.**
In addition to the previous work showing remdesivir to be an effective treatment for viral pathogens such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in cultured cells and animal models, a recent study found that administration of remdesivir to non-human primate models resulted in 100% protection against infection by the Ebola virus.
Although a clinical trial in the Democratic Republic of Congo found some evidence of effectiveness against Ebola, two antibody preparations were found to be more effective, and remdesivir was not pursued [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1910993].
Remdesivir has also been reported to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in a human cell line sensitive to the virus [@doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0].

The effectiveness of remdesivir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under investigation.
Remdesivir was first used on some COVID-19 patients under compassionate use guidelines [@doi:10.1126/science.abb7243, @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001191; @doi:10.1101/2020.03.09.20032896].
All were in late stages of COVID-19 infection, and these reports were inconclusive about the drug's efficacy.
Gilead Sciences, the maker of remdesivir, led a recent publication that reported outcomes for compassionate use of the drug in 61 patients hospitalized with confirmed COVID-19.
Here, 200mg of remdesivir was administered intravenously on day 1, followed by a further 100mg/day for 9 days [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007016].
There were significant issues with the study design or lack thereof.
There was no randomized control group.
The inclusion criteria were variable: some patients only required low doses of oxygen, others required ventilation.
The study included many sites, potentially with variable inclusion criteria and treatment protocols.
Patients analyzed had mixed demographics.
There was a short follow-up period of investigation.
Some patients worsened, some patients died, and eight were excluded from the analysis mainly due to missing post-baseline information, thus their health is unaccounted for.
Therefore, even though the study reported clinical improvement in 68% of the 53 patients ultimately evaluated, due to the significant issues with study design, it could not be determined whether treatment with remdesivir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of treatment.
Another study comparing 5 and 10 day treatment regimens had similar results but was also limited because of the lack of a placebo control [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015301].
The study did not alter our understanding of the efficacy of remdesivir in treating COVID-19, but the encouraging results motivated placebo controlled studies.

Remdesivir was later tested in a double-blind placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trial performed at 60 trial sites, 45 of which were in the United states.
The trial recruited 1,063 patients and randomly assigned them to placebo treatment or treatment with remdesivir.
The treatment was 200 mg on day 1, followed by 100 mg on days 2 through 10.
Data was analyzed from 1,059 patients (538 assigned to remdesivir and 521 to placebo).
The two groups were well matched demographically and clinically at baseline.
Those who received remdesivir had a median recovery time of 11 days (95% confidence interval [CI], 9 to 12), as compared with 15 days (95% CI, 13 to 19) in those who received placebo (rate ratio for recovery, 1.32; 95% CI, 1.12 to 1.55; P<0.001).
The Kaplan-Meier estimates of mortality by 14 days were 7.1% with remdesivir and 11.9% with placebo (hazard ratio for death, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.47 to 1.04).
Though mortality was lower in the remdesivir group, it was not significant.
Serious adverse events were reported for 114 of the 541 patients in the remdesivir group who underwent randomization (21.1%) and 141 of the 522 patients in the placebo group who underwent randomization (27.0%).
The median time to recovery in patients in the subgroup receiving invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) could not be established which may indicate that the follow up time was too short for this group (272 patients).
Largely on the results of this trial, the FDA issued the Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

As of July 2020, there are ten clinical trials underway using remdesivir to treat COVID-19 patients at both early and late stages of infection and in combinations with other drugs including [@doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0; @clinicaltrials:NCT04292730; @url:https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2020-000936-23/FR; @clinicaltrials:NCT04252664; @clinicaltrials:NCT04257656].

**Summary.**
Remdesivir is a first in class to receive FDA approval, currently as an Emergency Use Authorization.
It establishes proof of principle that drugs targeting the virus can benefit patients.
It also shows proof of principle that the virus can be targeted at the level of viral replication, since it targets the viral RNA polymerase at high potency.
Moreover, one of the most successful therapies for viral diseases is to target the viral replication machinery, which are typically virally encoded polymerases.
Small molecule drugs targeting viral polymerases are the backbones of treatments for other viral diseases including HIV and Herpes.
Note that the HIV and Herpes polymerases are a reverse transcriptase and a DNA polymerase respectively, whereas SARS-CoV-2 encodes an RNA dependent RNA polymerase, so most of the commonly used polymerase inhibitors are not likely to be active against SARS-CoV-2.
In clinical use, polymerase inhibitors show short term benefits for HIV patients but for long term benefits they must be part of combination regimens.
They are typically combined with protease inhibitors, integrase inhibitors and even other polymerase inhibitors.
Additional clinical trials of remdesivir on different patient pools and in combination with other therapies will refine its use in the clinic.

##### Protease Inhibitors

Several studies showed that viral proteases play an important role in the life cycle of (corona)viruses by modulating the cleavage of viral polyprotein precursors [@doi:10.2174/138161207780162971].
Several FDA-approved drugs target proteases, including lopinavir and ritonavir for HIV infection and simeprevir for hepatitis C virus infection.
In particular, serine protease inhibitors were suggested for the treatment of SARS and MERS viruses [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.01.011].
Recently, a study [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052] suggested that camostat mesylate, an FDA-approved protease inhibitor (PI) could block the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into lung cells in vitro.
However, to test the efficacy of PIs in patients, randomized clinical trials have to be conducted on patients and healthy volunteers.

###### N3
N3 is an inhibitor of Mpro, a 33.8-kDa SARS-CoV-2 protease that is involved in viral replication and transcription.

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
N3 inhibits Mpro through binding to its substrate pocket.

**Current Evidence.**
N3 was first designed computationally [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030324] to bind in the substrate binding pocket of the Mpro protease of SARS-like coronaviruses [@doi:10.1007/s13238-013-2841-3].
Subsequently, the structure of N3-bound SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was solved [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y], confirming the computational prediction.
Finally, N3 reduced the viral load in samples taken from patients.

**Summary.**
N3 is a computationally designed molecule that inhibits the viral transcription through inhibiting Mpro.
Although N3 is a strong inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, its safety and efficacy have to be tested in healthy volunteers and patients.

###### Ebselen
Ebselen identified as Mpro protease inhibitor.
It is currently investigated as an anti-oxidant drug [@doi:10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x].

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Ebselen inhibits Mpro through binding to its substrate pocket.

**Current Evidence.**
After the design and confirmation of N3 as a highly potent Michael acceptor inhibitor and the identification of Mpro structure [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3405], 10,000 compounds were screened for their in vitro anti-Mpro activity.
The six leads that were identified were Ebselen, Disulfiram, Tideglusib, Carmofour, PX-12.
When the compounds were further assayed on patient viral samples, Ebselen had the strongest potency in reducing the viral load.
However, the authors cautioned that these compounds are likely promiscuous binders, which would diminish their therapeutic potential.

**Summary.**
Ebselen is both a strong Mpro inhibitor and strong inhibitor of viral replication in vitro.
The reduction of the viral load after exposure to Ebselen was even larger than N3.
Ebselen is a very promising compound since its safety has been demonstrated in other indications.
However, Ebselen is likely a false positive since it is a promiscuous compound that can have many targets [@doi:10.1039/c8cc04258f].
Therefore, compounds with higher specificity are required to effectively translate to clinical trials.

##### Molecules Targeting the Viral Envelope

Why it may be useful

<!--##### Viral Envelope Targeter 1

**Anticipated Mechanism.**

**Current Evidence.**

A list of current studies and their results, using carefully the information requested in the therapeutic paper tickets.

**Summary.**

Summarize the state of the antiviral approach.
-->
#### Drugs Targeting Host Proteins

Brief background on the therapeutic.

##### Viral Entry Receptors

Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the cell depends on the ACE2 receptor and the enzyme encoded by _TMPRSS2_ [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052].
In principle, drugs that reduce the expression of these proteins or sterically hinder viral interactions with them might reduce viral entry into cells.

**Current Evidence.**
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are among the most commonly prescribed medications [@url:https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Lisinopril; @doi:10.1056/NEJMp1901657].
In the United States, for example, they are prescribed well over 100,000,000 times annually.
Data from some animal models suggest several, but not all, ACE inhibitors and several ARBs increase ACE2 expression in the cells of some organs [@doi:10.1093/cvr/cvaa097].
Clinical studies have not established whether plasma ACE2 expression is increased in humans treated with these medications [@doi:10.1093/europace/euw246].
While randomized clinical trials are ongoing, a variety of observational studies have examined the relationship between exposure to ACE inhibitors or ARBs and outcomes in patients with COVID-19.
An observational study of the association of ACE inhibitor or ARB exposure on outcomes in COVID-19 was retracted from the _New England Journal of Medicine_ [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007621].
Moreover, because observational studies are subject to confounding, randomized controlled trials are the standard means of assessing the effects of medications, and the findings of the various observational studies bearing on this topic cannot be interpreted as indicating a protective effect of the drug [@doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317205; @doi:10.2215/CJN.03530320].
Clinical trials testing the effects of ACE inhibitors or ARBs on COVID-19 outcomes are ongoing [@clinicaltrials:NCT04338009; @clinicaltrials:NCT04353596; @clinicaltrials:NCT04311177; @clinicaltrials:NCT04312009; @clinicaltrials:NCT04330300; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366050].
These studies of randomized intervention will provide important data for understanding whether exposure to ACEis or ARBs is associated with COVID-19 outcomes.
Additional information about ACE2, observational studies of ACE inhibitors and ARBs in COVID-19, and clinical trials on this topic have been summarized [@url:http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2].

**Summary.**
Summarize the state of the antiviral approach.

#### Broad-Spectrum Pharmaceuticals

- Add some background on broad-spectrum pharmaceuticals

##### Hydroxychloroquine and Chloroquine

**Potential Mechanism.**
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are lysosomotropic agents, meaning they are weak bases that can pass through the plasma membrane.
Both drugs increase cellular pH by accumulating in their protonated form inside lysosomes [@doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-163; @doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
This shift in pH inhibits the breakdown of proteins and peptides by the lysosomes during the process of proteolysis [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
A number of mechanisms have been proposed through which these drugs could influence the immune response to pathogen challenge.
For example, CQ/HCQ can interfere with digestion of antigens within the lysosome and inhibit CD4 T-cell stimulation while promoting the stimulation of CD8 T-cells [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
CQ/HCQ can also decrease the production of certain key cytokines involved in the immune response including IL-6 and inhibit the stimulation of toll-like receptors (TLR) and TLR signaling [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].
The drugs also have anti-inflammatory and photoprotective effects and may also affect rates of cell death, blood clotting, glucose tolerance, and cholesterol levels [@doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x].

Interest in CQ and HCQ for treating COVID-19 was catalyzed by a mechanism observed in _in vitro_ studies of both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.
In one study, CQ inhibited viral entry of SARS-CoV into Vero E6 cells, a cell line derived from the epithelial cells of an African green monkey kidney, through the elevation of endosomal pH and the terminal glycosylation of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is the cellular entry receptor [@doi:10.1186/1743-422X-2-69].
Increased pH within the cell, as discussed above, inhibits proteolysis, and terminal glycosylation of ACE2 is thought to interfere with virus-receptor binding.
An _in vitro_ study of SARS-CoV-2 infection of Vero cells, a line from which the Vero E6 clone has been separated since 1968, found both HCQ and CQ to be effective in inhibiting viral replication, with HCQ being more potent [@doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa237].
Additionally, an early case study of three COVID-19 patients reported the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in all three patients [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2007575].
Antiphospholipid antibodies are central to the diagnosis of the antiphospholipid syndrome, a disorder that HCQ has often been used to treat [@doi:10.1182/blood.V128.22.5023.5023; @doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.053; @doi:10.1182/asheducation-2016.1.714].
Together, these studies triggered initial enthusiasm about the therapeutic potential for HCQ and CQ against COVID-19.
HCQ/CQ has been proposed both as a treatment for COVID-19 and a prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 exposure.
Additionally, HCQ/CQ are sometimes administered with azithromycin (AZ) and/or zinc supplementation.
This section will discuss the current information available on the administration of CQ and HCQ as a treatment for or prophylaxis against COVID-19.

<!--
rishirajgoel to add text on Azithromycin
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4262884/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5918160/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28099856
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27911847
-->

**Controversy.**
The initial study evaluating HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19 patients was published on March 20, 2020 by Gautret et al.
This non-randomized, non-blinded, non-placebo clinical trial compared HCQ to standard of care in 42 hospitalized patients in southern France [@doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105949].
They reported that patients who received HCQ showed higher rates of virological clearance by nasopharyngeal swab on Days 3-6 when compared to standard care.
This study also treated six patients with both HCQ + AZ and found this combination therapy to be more effective than HCQ alone.
This study showed design and analysis weaknesses that severely limit interpretability of results, including the lack of randomization, lack of blinding, lack of placebo, lack of Intention-To-Treat analysis, lack of correction for sequential multiple comparisons, trial arms entirely confounded by hospital, false negatives in outcome measurements, lack of trial pre-registration, and small sample size.
Two of these weaknesses are due to inappropriate data analysis and can therefore be corrected post-hoc by recalculating p-values (lack of Intention-To-Treat analysis and multiple comparisons.)
However, all other weaknesses are fundamental design flaws and cannot be corrected for.
Thus, conclusions cannot be generalized outside of the study.
The International Society of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, the scientific organization that publishes _International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents_ where the article appeared, has announced that the article does not meet its expected standard for publications [@url:https://www.isac.world/news-and-publications/official-isac-statement], although it has not been officially retracted.
Because of the preliminary data presented in this study, the use of HCQ in COVID-19 treatment has subsequently been explored by other researchers.
About one week later, a follow-up case study reported that 11 consecutive patients were treated with HCQ + AZ using the same dosing regimen [@doi:10.1016/j.medmal.2020.03.006].
One patient died, two were transferred to the ICU, and one developed a prolonged QT interval, leading to discontinuation of HCQ + AZ.
As in the Gautret et al. study, the outcome assessed was virological clearance at Day 6 post-treatment, as measured in nasopharyngeal swabs.
Of the ten living patients on Day 6, eight remained positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Like in the original study, interpretability was severely limited by lack of comparison group and the small sample size.
However, these results stand in contrast to the claims by Gautret et al. that all six patients treated with HCQ + AZ tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA by Day 6 post-treatment.
This case study illustrated the need for further investigation using robust study design before the original proposed benefits of HCQ could be widely accepted.

On April 10, 2020, a randomized, non-placebo trial of 62 COVID-19 patients at the Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University was released [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040758].
This study investigated whether HCQ decreased time to fever break or time to cough relief when compared to standard of care [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040758].
This trial found HCQ decreased both average time to fever break and average time to cough relief, defined as mild or no cough.
While this study improved on some of the methodological flaws in Gautret et al. by randomizing patients, it also had several flaws in trial design and data analysis that prevent generalization of the results.
These weaknesses include the lack of placebo, lack of correction for multiple primary outcomes, inappropriate choice of outcomes, lack of sufficient detail to understand analysis, drastic disparities between pre-registration and published protocol, and small sample size.
The choice of outcomes may be inappropriate as both fevers and cough may break periodically without resolution of illness.
Additionally, for these outcomes, the authors reported that 23 of 62 patients did not have a fever and 25 of 62 patients did not have a cough at the start of the study, but the authors failed to describe how these patients were included in a study assessing time to fever break and time to cough relief.
It is important to note here that the authors claimed "neither the research performers nor the patients were aware of the treatment assignments."
This blinding seems impossible in a non-placebo trial because at the very least, providers would know whether they were administering a medication or not, and this knowledge could lead to systematic differences in the administration of care.
Correction for multiple primary outcomes can be adjusted post-hoc by recalculating p-values, but all of the other issues were design and statistical weaknesses that cannot be corrected for.
Additionally, the observation of drastic disparities between pre-registration and published protocol could indicate p-hacking.
The design limitations mean that the conclusions cannot be generalized outside of the study.
A second randomized trial, conducted by the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, analyzed whether HCQ increased rates of virological clearance at day 7 in respiratory pharyngeal swabs compared to standard care [@doi:10/drbx].
This trial was published in Chinese along with an abstract in English, and only the English abstract was read and interpreted for this review.
The trial found comparable outcomes in virological clearance rate, time to virological clearance, and time to body temperature normalization between the treatment and control groups.
A known weakness is small sample size, with only 30 patients enrolled and 15 in each arm.
This problem suggests the study is underpowered to detect potentially useful differences and precludes interpretation of results.
Additionally, because only the abstract could be read, other design and analysis issues could be present.
Thus, though these studies added randomization to their assessment of HCQ, their conclusions should be interpreted very cautiously.
These two studies assessed different outcomes and reached differing conclusions about the efficacy of HCQ for treating COVID-19; the designs of both studies, especially with respect to sample size, meant that no general conclusions can be made about the efficacy of the drug.

Several widely reported studies on HCQ have issues with data integrity and/or provenance.
A Letter to the Editor published in _BioScience Trends_ on March 16, 2020 claimed that numerous clinical trials have shown that HCQ is superior to control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of COVID-19 pneumonia [@doi:10.5582/bst.2020.01047].
This letter has been cited by numerous primary literature, review articles, and media alike [@doi:10.7150/ijbs.45498; @doi:10.7150/ijbs.45053].
However, the letter referred to 15 pre-registration identifiers from the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry.
When these identifiers are followed back to the registry, most trials claim they are not yet recruiting patients or are currently recruiting patients.
For all of these 15 identifiers, no data uploads or links to publications could be located on the pre-registrations.
At the very least, the lack of availability of the primary data means the claim that HCQ is efficacious against COVID-19 pneumonia cannot be verified.
Similarly, a recent multinational registry analysis [@doi:10/ggwzsb] analyzed the efficacy of CQ and HCQ with and without a macrolide, which is a class of antibiotics that includes Azithromycin, for the treatment of COVID-19.
The study observed 96,032 patients split into a control and four treatment conditions (CQ with and without a macrolide; HCQ with and without a macrolide).
They concluded that treatment with CQ and HCQ was associated with increased risk of _de novo_ ventricular arrhythmia during hospitalization.
However, this study has since been retracted by _The Lancet_ due to an inability to validate the data used [@doi:10/ggzqng].
These studies demonstrate that increased skepticism in evaluation of the HCQ/CQ and COVID-19 literature may be warranted, possible because of the significant attention HCQ and CQ have received as possible treatments for COVID-19 and the politicization of these drugs.

Despite the fact that the study suggesting that CQ/HCQ increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia in COVID-19 patients has now been retracted, previous studies have identified risks with HCQ/CQ.
A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus developed a prolonged QT interval that was likely exacerbated by use of HCQ in combination with renal failure [@doi:10.1155/2016/4626279].
A prolonged QT interval is associated with ventricular arrhythmia [@doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2008.05.008].
Furthermore, a separate study [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551] investigated the safety associated with the use of HCQ with and without macrolides between 2000 and 2020.
The study involved 900,000 cases treated with HCQ and 300,000 cases treated with HCQ + AZ.
The results indicated that short-term use of HCQ was not associated with additional risk, but that HCQ + AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and a two-fold increased risk of mortality.
Therefore, whether studies utilize HCQ alone or HCQ in combination with a macrolide may be an important consideration in assessing risk.
As results from initial investigations of these drug combinations have emerged, concerns about the efficacy and risks of treating COVID-19 with HCQ and CQ has led to the removal of CQ/HCQ from standard of care practices in several countries [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.07.20056424; @url:https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/13/health/chloroquine-risks-coronavirus-treatment-trials-study/index.html].
As of May 25, 2020, WHO had suspended administration of HCQ as part of the worldwide Solidarity Trial [@raw:WHO_briefing_2020_5_25].

**Current Evidence.**
As additional research has emerged, it remains unclear whether HCQ and/or CQ affect COVID-19 outcomes.
A randomized, open-label, non-placebo trial of 150 COVID-19 patients was conducted in parallel at 16 government-designated COVID-19 centers in China to assess the safety and efficacy of HCQ [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.10.20060558].
The trial compared treatment with HCQ in conjunction with standard of care (SOC) to SOC alone in 150 infected patients who were assigned randomly to the two groups (75 per group).
The primary endpoint of the study was the negative conversion rate of SARS-CoV-2 in 28 days, and the investigators found no difference in this parameter between the groups.
The secondary endpoints were an amelioration of the symptoms of the disease such as axillary temperature ≤36.6°C, SpO2 >94% on room air, and disappearance of symptoms like shortness of breath, cough, and sore throat.
The median time to symptom alleviation was similar across different conditions (19 days in HCQ+SOC vs. 21 days in SOC).
However, the investigators reported an interesting finding revealed in _post hoc_ analysis: controlling for the administration of antivirals yielded an effect of HCQ on the alleviation of symptoms, with a reported hazard ratio of 8.83, although the 95% confidence interval of 1.09 to 71.3 suggests that this analysis may be underpowered and should be interpreted cautiously, as only 28 patients total (14 in each group) met this criterion.
Additionally, there was a non-significant trend towards a greater number of lymphocytes in the SOC+HCQ group compared to the SOC-alone group (mean of 0.062 versus 0.008; p=0.57).
Given the improvement in CRP levels and the possible improvement in lymphocyte count, the authors hypothesized that the addition of HCQ to the current SOC could decrease the inflammatory response, which could help to prevent multiorgan failure and death.
However, one of the key results of this trial was that the 30% of the patients receiving SOC+HCQ reported adverse outcomes compared to 8.8% of patients receiving only SOC.
The most common adverse outcome in the SOC+HCQ group was diarrhea (10% vs. 0% in the SOC group, p=0.004).

The adverse effects of administering HCQ to mild and moderate COVID-19 cases were found to be manageable.
Furthermore, there are several factors that limit the interpretability of this study.
Most of the enrolled patients had mild-to-moderate symptoms (98%), and the average age was 46.
Although the authors claimed that HCQ could be beneficial in hindering disease progression, multiorgan failure, and death in COVID-19, this finding cannot be extrapolated to older patients, who are known to be at higher risk, or to severe cases.
Additionally, a larger sample size is needed to validate whether lymphocyte counts increase in patients treated with SOC+HCQ; although the result in the present analysis appeared promising, it lacked statistical significance.
Likewise, in this study, SOC included the use of antivirals (Lopinavir-Ritonavir, Arbidol, Oseltamivir, Virazole, Entecavir, Ganciclovir, and Interferon alfa), which appeared to introduce confounding effects.
Thus, to isolate the effect of HCQ, SOC would need to exclude the use of antivirals.
In this trial, the samples used to test for the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus were collected from the upper respiratory tract, and the authors indicated that the use of upper respiratory samples may have introduced false negatives (e.g., [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786]); thus, the identification of biomarkers that can be collected non-invasively would be valuable to studies such as this one.
Another limitation of the study that the authors acknowledge was that the HCQ treatment began, on average, at a 16-day delay from the symptom onset.
An investigation of earlier intervention with HCQ would help to elucidate how the drug affects early disease management.
Overall, the study provides promising data, although all of the findings still need to be validated in independent population cohorts.
The fact that this study was open-label and lacked a placebo limits interpretation, and additional analysis is required to determine whether HCQ reduces inflammatory response.

Additional evidence comes from a retrospective analysis [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920] that examined data from 368 COVID-19 patients across all United States Veteran Health Administration medical centers.
The study retrospectively investigated the effect of the administration of HCQ (n=97), HCQ + AZ (n=113), and no HCQ (n=158) on 368 patients.
The primary outcomes assessed were death and the need for mechanical ventilation.
Standard supportive care was rendered to all patients.
Due to the low representation of women (N=17) in the available data, the study included only men, and the median age was 65 years.
The rate of death in the HCQ-only treatment condition was 27.8% and in the HCQ + AZ treatment condition, it was 22.1%.
In comparison to the 14.1% rate of death in the no-HCQ cohort, these data indicated a statistically significant elevation in the risk of death for the HCQ-only group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted hazard ratio: 2.61, p=0.03), but not for the HCQ + AZ group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted hazard ratio: 1.14; p=0.72).
Further, the risk of ventilation was similar across all three groups (adjusted hazard ratio: 1.43, p=0.48 (HCQ) and 0.43, p=0.09 (HCQ + AZ) compared to no HCQ).
The study thus showed evidence of an association between increased mortality and HCQ in this cohort of COVID-19 patients but no change in rates of mechanical ventilation among the treatment conditions.
The study had a few limitations: it was not randomized, and the baseline vital signs, laboratory tests, and prescription drug use were significantly different among the three groups.
All of these factors could potentially influence treatment outcome.
Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not part of the study.
The reported result that HCQ + AZ is safer than HCQ contradicts the findings of the previous large-scale analysis of twenty years of records that found HCQ + AZ to be more frequently associated with cardiac arrhythmia than HCQ alone [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551]; whether this discrepancy is caused by the pathology of COVID-19, is influenced by age or sex, or is a statistical artifact is not presently known.

Thus, both of the above studies have significant limitations but analyzed data acquired broadly from centers within a country's health system in China and the United States, respectively.
Neither study reported robust improvements in patients treated with HCQ, although the Tang et al. study identified potential improvements associated with HCQ in _post hoc_ analysis.
In contrast, the VA study found that HCQ was associated with increased risk of mortality in COVID-19 patients.
These two studies examined different populations, especially since age and sex have both been found to influence the severity of COVID-19.
Additional analyses to increase sample size and encompassing a variety of ages and sexes could help to resolve the potential benefits and risks of HCQ administration to COVID-19 patients.
A randomized, blinded study with a placebo would serve to overcome many of the limitations in the design of these studies.

One study did utilize a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design, although this study analyzed the administration of HCQ prophylactically rather than therapeutically [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638].
Asymptomatic adults in the United States and Canada who had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 within the past four days were enrolled in an online study to see whether administration of HCQ over five days would influence the probability of developing COVID-19 symptoms over a 14-day period.
Of the participants, 414 received HCQ and 407 received a placebo.
Other than location, the demographics of this study were more comparable to the Yang et al. study above, as 51.6% of participants were women and the median age was 40 years.
They found no significant difference in the rate of symptomatic illness between the two groups (11.8% HCQ, 14.3% placebo, p=0.35).
The HCQ condition was associated with side effects, with 40.1% of patients reporting side effects compared to 16.8% in the control group (p<0.001).
However, likely due to the high enrollment of healthcare workers (66% of participants) and the well-known side effects associated with HCQ, a large number of participants were able to correctly identify whether they were receiving HCQ or a placebo (46.5% and 35.7%, respectively).
Furthermore, due to a lack of availability of diagnostic testing, only 20 of the 107 cases  were confirmed with a PCR-based test to be positive for SARS-CoV-2.
The rest were categorized as "probable" or "possible" cases by a panel of four physicians who were blind to the treatment status.
However, a patient presenting one or more symptoms, which included diarrhea, was defined as a "possible" case, but diarrhea is also a common side effect of HCQ.
Additionally, four of the twenty PCR-confirmed cases did not develop symptoms until after the observation period had completed, suggesting that the 14-day trial period may not have been long enough or the initial exposure may not have accounted for secondary exposure, given that most of the patients were exposed through situations that were likely to be recurrent: by a close family member with a COVID-19 diagnosis or through their work in healthcare.
Finally, in addition to the young age of the participants in this study, which ranged from 32 to 51, there were possible impediments to generalization introduced by the selection process, as the 2,237 patients who were eligible but had already developed symptoms by day 4 were enrolled in a separate study.
It is therefore likely that asymptomatic cases were over-represented in this sample, which would not have been detected based on the diagnostic criteria used.
Therefore, while this study does represent the first effort to conduct a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled investigation of HCQ's effect on COVID-19 symptoms in a large sample, the lack of PCR tests significantly impedes interpretation of the results.

**Summary.**
_In vitro_ evidence suggests that HCQ may be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
Because the 90% effective concentration (EC~90~) of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) can be achieved in and tolerated by rheumatoid arthritis patients, it was hypothesized that it might also be possible to achieve the effective concentration in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114].
Additionally, HCQ has been found to be effective in treating HIV [@doi:10/cq2hx9] and chronic Hepatitis C [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575] patients.
Therefore, initially it was thought that CQ/HCQ could be effective against SARS-COV-2.
CQ and HCQ have both been found to inhibit the expression of CD154 in T-cells and to reduce toll-like receptor signaling that leads to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [@doi:10.1038/s41584-020-0372-x].
Clinical trials for COVID-19 have more often used HCQ rather than CQ because it offers the advantages of being cheaper and having fewer side effects than CQ.
Several countries have removed CQ from their standard of care for COVID-19 due to the frequency of adverse effects.
However, a large analysis of patients receiving HCQ from January 2000 through March 2020 reported that the combination of HCQ and azithromycin, but not other macrolides, was associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular complications and mortality.
Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess HCQ as a therapeutic agent for COVID-19, and many more are in progress.
To date, none of these studies have used randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled designs with a large sample size, which would be the gold standard.
The one exception was an analysis of the prophylactic potential of HCQ [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638], which was designed to meet all these criteria, but masking was not adequately maintained during the study and the outcomes were not accurately assessed due to the lack of availability of PCR-based testing in the United States and Canada.
Thus, interpretation is severely limited and must be done cautiously.
Due to inconsistency in the outcomes assessed and results reported from study to study, it remains unclear whether HCQ, or HCQ + AZ as a combination therapy, holds any therapeutic or prophylactic value against COVID-19.
Additionally, one study identified an increased risk of mortality in older men receiving HCQ, and administration of HCQ and HCQ+AZ did not decrease the use of mechanical ventilation in these patients [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920].
HCQ use for COVID-19 also leads to shortages for anti-malarial or anti-rheumatic use, where it has been definitively proven to be effective.
Further investigation of HCQ in large, rigorous, multi-center clinical trials encompassing different sex and ages is required.

#### Nutraceuticals

Considering the current pandemic, scientists and the medical community are scrambling to repurpose or discover novel host-directed therapies for which nutraceuticals hold some promise.
Nutraceuticals are classified as supplements with health benefits beyond their basic nutritional value [@doi:10.1080/10408390902841529; @doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2016.103].
The key difference between a dietary supplement and a nutraceutical is that nutraceuticals should not only supplement the diet, but they must also aid in the prophylaxis and/or treatment of a disorder or disease [@doi:10.1208/ps050325].
Unlike pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals do not fall under the responsibility of the FDA, but they are monitored as dietary supplements according to the Dietary Supplement, Health and Education Act 1994 (DSHEA) [@url:https://ods.od.nih.gov/About/DSHEA_Wording.aspx] and the Drug Administration Modernization Act 1997 [@url:https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/selected-amendments-fdc-act/food-and-drug-administration-modernization-act-fdama-1997].
However, there is significant concern that these acts do not adequately protect the consumer as they ascribe responsibility on the manufacturers to ensure safety of the product before manufacturing or marketing [@doi:10.1080/17512433.2018.1464911].
Likewise, manufacturers are not required to register or seek approval from the FDA to produce or sell food supplements or nutraceuticals.
Health or nutrient content claims for labeling purposes are approved based on an authoritative statement from the Academy of Sciences or relevant federal authorities once the FDA has been notified and on the basis that the information is known to be true and not deceptive [@doi:10.1080/17512433.2018.1464911].
In Europe, health claims are only permitted on a product label following authorization according to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidelines on nutrition and health claims [@url:https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/labelling_nutrition/claims/register/public].
EFSA does not currently distinguish between food supplements and nutraceuticals for health claim applications of new products as claim authorization is dependent on the availability of clinical data in order to substantiate efficacy [@doi:10.1111/bcp.13496].
These guidelines seem to provide more protection to consumers.
Currently, there is a debate among scientists and regulatory authorities to develop a regulatory framework in order to deal with the challenges of safety and health claim substantiation for nutraceuticals [@doi:10.1111/bcp.13496; @doi:10.1080/17512433.2018.1464911].

Nutraceuticals purported to boost the immune response, reduce immunopathology, exhibit antiviral activities or prevent acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are being considered for their potential therapeutic value [@doi:10/ggkd3b].
A host of potential candidates have been highlighted in the literature that target various aspects of the COVID-19 viral pathology, while others are thought to prime the host immune system.
These candidates include vitamins and minerals along with extracts and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25707].
Considerable evidence _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ suggests that nutraceuticals containing phycocyanobilin, N-acetylcysteine, glucosamine, selenium or phase 2 inductive nutraceuticals (e.g. ferulic acid, lipoic acid, or sulforaphane) can prevent or modulate RNA virus infections via amplification of the signaling activity of mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS) and activation of toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) [@doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2020.02.007].
While promising, further animal and human studies are required to assess the therapeutic potential of these various nutraceuticals against COVID-19.

##### n-3 PUFA

Another potential nutraceutical that has exhibited beneficial effects against various viral infections is n-3 PUFA [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25707], such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).
EPA and DHA intake can come from a diet high in fish or through dietary supplementation with fish oils or purified oils [@doi:10.1039/c9fo01742a].

**Potential Mechanisms.**
n-3 PUFA nutraceuticals can mediate inflammation, and therefore they may have the capacity to modulate the adaptive immune response [@doi:10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04374.x; @doi:10.1039/c9fo01742a; @doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2016.103].
Another potential mechanism through which n-3 PUFA could exert beneficial effects against viral infections is by acting as precursor molecules for the biosynthesis of endogenous specialized proresolving mediators (SPM), such as protectins and resolvins, that actively resolve inflammation and infection [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.02.009].
Finally, some COVID-19 patients, particularly those with co-morbidities, are at a significant risk of thrombotic complications including arterial and venous thrombosis [@doi:10.1182/blood.2020006000; @doi:10.1007/s11239-020-02134-3].
Therefore, the use of prophylactic and therapeutic anticoagulants and antithrombotic agents is under consideration [@doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.031].

**Current Evidence.**
SPM have exhibited beneficial effects against a variety of lung infections including RNA viruses [@doi:10.1038/nri.2015.4].
Indeed, protectin D1 has been shown to increase survival from H1N1 viral infection in mice by affecting the viral replication machinery [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.027].
Several mechanisms for SPM have been proposed, including preventing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines or increasing phagocytosis of cellular debris by macrophages [@doi:10.1038/nature13479].
In influenza, SPM promote antiviral B lymphocytic activities [@doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1302795], and protectin D1 has been shown to increase survival from H1N1 viral infection in mice by affecting the viral replication machinery [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.027].
It is hypothesized that SPM may aid in the resolution of the cytokine storm and pulmonary inflammation associated with COVID-19 [@doi:10.1007/s10555-020-09889-4].
However, not all studies are in agreement that n-3 PUFA are effective against infections [@doi:10.3945/jn.109.108027].
The effectiveness of n-3 PUFA against infections would be dependent on the dosage, timing, and the specific pathogens responsible [@doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2016.10.001].
On another level, there is still the question of whether fish oils can raise the levels of SPM levels upon ingestion and in response to acute inflammation in humans [@doi:10.1194/jlr.M060392].

The increased risk of thrombotic complications in COVID-19 infected patients was reported relatively late in comparison to other COVID-19 manifestations [@doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.013; @doi:10.1182/blood.2020006000].
Considering that there is significant evidence that n-3 fatty acids and other fish oil-derived lipids possess antithrombotic properties and anti-inflammatory properties [@doi:10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2018.09.005; @doi:10.1016/j.blre.2020.100694], they may have therapeutic value against the prothrombotic complications of COVID-19.
Based on concern among the medical community that the use of investigational therapeutics on COVID-19 patients already on antiplatelet therapies due to a pre-existing comorbidities may lead to issues with dosing and drug choice, and/or negative drug-drug interactions [@doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.031], this supplementation may be particularly important for patients already receiving pharmaceutical antiplatelet therapies who may become infected.
As a result, the use of other therapeutics such as dietary sources of n-3 fatty acids or nutraceuticals with antiplatelet activities may be beneficial and warrant further investigation.
A new clinical trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT04412018] is currently recruiting COVID-19 positive patients to investigate the anti-inflammatory activity of a recently developed, highly purified derivative of EPA known as icosapent ethyl (Vascepa ^TM^) [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1812792].
Other randomized controlled trials are in the preparatory stages with the intention of investigating the administration of EPA and other bioactive compounds to COVID-19 positive patients to determine whether anti-inflammatory effects or disease state improvements are observed [@clinicaltrials:NCT04335032; @clinicaltrials:NCT04323228].
Finally, while there have been studies investigating the therapeutic value of n-3 fatty acids against ARDS in humans, there is still limited evidence of their effectiveness [@doi:10.3390/ijms21093104].

**Summary.**
The overall lack of human studies in this area means there is limited evidence as to whether these nutraceuticals could affect COVID-19 infection.
Consequently, clinical trials that have been proposed and are in the preparatory stages will investigate the anti-inflammatory potential of n-3 PUFA and their derivatives for the treatment of COVID-19.

##### Zinc

There is evidence that nutrient supplements may exhibit some benefit against RNA viral infections.
Zinc is a trace metal obtained from dietary sources or supplementation that is important for the maintenance of immune cells involved in adaptive and innate immunity [@doi:10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.022].
Zinc supplements can be administered orally as a tablet or as a lozenge and they are available in many forms, such as zinc picolinate, zinc acetate, and zinc citrate.
Zinc is also available from dietary sources including meat, seafood, nuts, seeds, legumes, and dairy.

**Potential Mechanisms.**
The role of zinc in immune function has been extensively reviewed [@doi:10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.022].
Zinc is an important signaling molecule and zinc levels can alter host defense systems.
In inflammatory situations such as an infection, zinc can regulate leukocyte immune responses and it can activate the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB), thus altering cytokine production [@doi:10.4049/jimmunol.179.6.4180; @doi:10.1067/mlc.2001.118108].
In particular, zinc supplementation can increase natural killer cell levels, which are important cells for host defense against viral infections [@doi:10.1126/science.1198687; @doi:10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.022].

**Current Evidence.**
Adequate zinc intake has been associated with reduced incidence of infection [@doi:10.1093/ajcn/85.3.837] and antiviral immunity [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmz013].
Similarly, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that administered zinc supplementation to elderly subjects over the course of a year found zinc deficiency to be associated with increased susceptibility to infection and that zinc deficiency could be prevented through supplementation [@doi:10.1093/ajcn/85.3.837].
Clinical trial data supports the utility of zinc to diminish the duration and severity of symptoms associated with common colds when it is provided within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms [@doi:10.1331/1544-3191.44.5.594.Hulisz; @doi:10.2174/1874306401105010051].
In coronaviruses specifically, in vitro evidence demonstrates that the combination of zinc (Zn2+) and zinc ionophores (pyrithione) can interrupt the replication mechanisms of SARS-CoV-GFP (a fluorescently tagged SARS-CoV) and a variety of other RNA viruses [@doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001176; @doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.12.015].
Currently, there are over ten clinical trials registered with the intention to use zinc in a preventative or therapeutic manner.
Many of these trials have proposed the use of zinc in conjunction with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin [@clinicaltrials:NCT04370782; @clinicaltrials:NCT04377646; @clinicaltrials:NCT04395768; @clinicaltrials:NCT04373733].
However, it is not known how these trials will respond to the emerging lack of evidence supporting the use of hydroxychloroquine.
Other trials are investigating zinc in conjunction with other nutrients such as vitamin C or n-3 PUFA [@clinicaltrials:NCT04342728; @clinicaltrials:NCT04323228].

**Summary.**

Though there is, overall, encouraging data for zinc supplementation against the common cold and viral infections, there is currently limited evidence to suggest zinc supplementation has any beneficial effects against the current novel COVID-19; thus, the clinical trials that are currently underway will provide vital information on the efficacious use of zinc in COVID-19 prevention and/or treatment.
However, given the limited risk, maintaining a healthy diet to ensure an adequate zinc status may be advisable for individuals seeking to reduce their likelihood of infection.

##### Vitamin C

Vitamins B, C, D, and E have also been suggested as potential nutrient supplement interventions for COVID-19 [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25707; @doi:10.20944/preprints202003.0347.v1].
In particular vitamin C has been proposed as a potential therapeutic agent against COVID-19.
Vitamin C can be obtained via dietary sources such as fruit and vegetable or via supplementation.

**Potential Mechanisms.**
Vitamin C plays a significant role in promoting immune function due to its effects on various immune cells.
Vitamin C affects inflammation by modulating cytokine production, decreasing histamine levels, enhancing the differentiation and proliferation of T- and B-lymphocytes, increasing antibody levels, and protecting against the negative effects of reactive oxygen species amongst other effects [@doi:10.1155/2014/426740; @doi:10.1007/s00210-013-0880-1; @doi:10.3390/nu9111211].
During viral infections vitamin C is utilized as evinced by lower concentrations in leukocytes and lower concentrations of urinary vitamin C.
Post-infection, these levels return to baseline ranges [@doi:10.1177/003693307301800102; @doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1975.tb29312.x; @doi:10/fd22sv; @doi:10.3390/nu9040339; @doi:10.1079/bjn19920004].

**Current Evidence.**
A recent meta-analysis found consistent support for regular vitamin C supplementation reducing the duration of the common cold, but that supplementation with vitamin C (> 200 mg) failed to reduce the incidence of colds [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000980.pub4].
Individual studies have found Vitamin C to reduce the susceptibility of patients to lower respiratory tract infections such as pneumonia [@doi:10.1097/00006454-199709000-00003].
Another meta-analysis has demonstrated in twelve trials that vitamin C supplementation reduced the length of stay of patients in intensive care units (ICUs) by 7.8% (95% CI: 4.2% to 11.2%; p = 0.00003).
Furthermore, high doses (1-3 g/day) significantly reduced the length of an ICU stay by 8.6% in six trials (p = 0.003).
Vitamin C also shortened the duration of mechanical ventilation by 18.2% in three trials in which patients required intervention for over 24 hours (95% CI 7.7% to 27%; p = 0.001) [@doi:10.3390/nu11040708].
Despite these findings, the CITRUS ALI study failed to show a benefit of a 96-hour infusion of vitamin C to treat ARDS, which is a severe complication of COVID-19 infection [@doi:10.1001/jama.2019.11825].
Nevertheless, a randomized placebo-controlled trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT04264533] has begun in Wuhan, China to investigate the intravenous infusion of vitamin C to treat pneumonia in 140 severe COVID-19 infected patients.
As summarized by Carr [@doi:10.1186/s13054-020-02851-4] the trial will not be completed until September 2020.
Another trial in Italy [@clinicaltrials:NCT04323514] intends to deliver a 10 g infusion of vitamin C to 500 severe COVID-19 patients with pneumonia to assess in-hospital mortality over a 72 hr period as the primary outcome.
The trial is currently recruiting and is due to run until March 2021.
We will not know how effective vitamin C is as a therapeutic for quite some time due to the length of both trials.
These are not the only trials investigating the potential value of vitamin C, as there are currently (as of June 2020) over fifteen trials registered with clinicaltrials.gov that are either recruiting or are currently in preparation.
When completed, the trials will provide crucial evidence on the efficacy of vitamin C as a therapeutic for COVID-19 infection.

**Summary.**
Some evidence suggests that vitamin C supplementation or infusion can shorten the duration of a cold, reduce an individual's susceptibility to infections, and shorten a patient's stay in an ICU when administered at high doses.
We don't yet understand if these findings apply to COVID-19.
There are ongoing trials in China and Italy that will inform our understanding of the therapeutic value of vitamin C supplementation for COVID-19.


##### Vitamin D

In terms of other dietary supplements, vitamin D can modulate the adaptive and innate immune system and has been associated with various aspects of health.
Vitamin D can be sourced through diet or supplementation, but it is mainly biosynthesized by the body on exposure to sunlight.

**Potential Mechanisms.**
Vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increased susceptibility to infection [@doi:10.2310/JIM.0b013e31821b8755].
In particular, vitamin D deficient patients are at risk of developing acute respiratory infections [@doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.11.017] and ARDS [@doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.11.017].
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (25-hydroxyvitamin D) is the active form of vitamin D that is involved in adaptive and innate responses, whereby the vitamin D receptor is expressed in various immune cells and vitamin D is an immunomodulator of antigen presenting cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, monocytes, and T- and B-lymphocytes [@doi:10.2310/JIM.0b013e31821b8755; @doi:10.1016/j.coph.2010.04.001].
Due to its potential immunomodulating properties, vitamin D supplementation may be advantageous to maintain a healthy immune system.

**Current Evidence.**
A recent review postulated that an individual’s vitamin D status may significantly affect their risk of developing COVID-19 [@doi:10.3390/nu12040988].
This hypothesis was derived from the fact that the current pandemic emerged in winter in Wuhan China when 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations are at their lowest due to a lack of sunlight, whereas in the Southern Hemisphere, where it was nearing the end of the summer and higher 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations would be higher, the number of cases was low.
The authors suggest that people at risk of developing COVID-19 should increase their vitamin D3 intake to reach 25-hydroxyvitamin D plasma concentrations above 40–60 ng/ml.
The authors also suggest high-dose supplementation of vitamin D to treat infected patients and to prevent infection in hospital staff [@doi:10.3390/nu12040988].
While vitamin D is relatively inexpensive and safe to consume, caution is warranted when interpreting this review as it has yet to be determined whether vitamin D levels affect COVID-19 outside of this geographic/climatic correlation.
Likewise, though it is assumed that COVID-19 may be seasonal, multiple other factors that can affect vitamin D levels should also be considered.
These factors include an individual’s nutritional status, their age, their occupation, skin pigmentation, potential comorbidities, and the variation of exposure to sunlight due to latitude amongst others.
As the pandemic evolves, further research has investigated some of the potential links identified in the Grant et al. review [@doi:10.3390/nu12040988] between vitamin D and COVID-19 and sought to shed light on whether there is any  prophylactic and/or therapeutic relationship.
A study in Switzerland demonstrated that 27 SARS-CoV-2 positive patients exhibited 25-hydroxyvitamin D plasma concentrations that were significantly lower (11.1 ng/ml) than those of SARS-CoV-2 negative patients (24.6 ng/ml; p = 0.004), an association that held when stratifying for patients greater than 70 years old [@doi:10.3390/nu12051359].
These findings seem to be supported by a Belgian observational study of 186 SARS-CoV-2 positive patients exhibiting symptoms of pneumonia, where 25-hydroxyvitamin D plasma concentrations were measured and a CT scan of the lungs was obtained upon hospitalization [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.01.20079376].
A significant difference in 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels was observed between the SARS-CoV-2 patients and 2,717 season-matched diseased controls.
Both female and male patients possessed lower median 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations than the control group (18.6 ng/ml versus 21.5 ng/ml; p = 0.0016) and a higher rate of vitamin D deficiency (58.6% versus 42.5%).
Evidence of sexual dimorphism was apparent, as female patients had equivalent levels of 23-hydroxyvitamin D to the control group, whereas male patients were deficient in 25-hydroxyvitamin D relative to male controls (67% versus 49%; p = 0.0006).
Notably, vitamin D deficiency was progressively lower in males with advancing radiological disease stages (p = 0.001).
Despite these two observational studies potentially linking vitamin D with COVID-19, an examination of the UK Biobank did not support this thesis [@doi:10.1016/j.dsx.2020.04.050].
This analysis examined 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations in 348,598 UK Biobank participants, of which 449 were SARS-CoV-2 positive.
There is significant interest in the link between vitamin D and COVID-19, hence the multitude of studies published in the literature of varying quality and the clinical trials underway.
One trial is currently investigating the utility of vitamin D as an immune-modulating agent by monitoring whether administration of vitamin D precipitates an improvement of health status in non-severe symptomatic patients infected with COVID-19 or whether vitamin D prevents patient deterioration [@clinicaltrials:NCT04334005].
Other trials are also underway examining various factors including mortality, symptom recovery, severity of disease, rates of ventilation, inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6, blood cell counts, and the prophylactic capacity of vitamin D administration [@clinicaltrials:NCT04385940; @clinicaltrials:NCT04334005; @clinicaltrials:NCT04411446; @clinicaltrials:NCT04344041].
Concomitant administration of vitamin D with pharmaceuticals such as aspirin [@clinicaltrials:NCT04363840] and bioactive molecules such as resveratrol [@clinicaltrials:NCT04400890] are also under investigation.

**Summary.**
Supplementation of vitamin D and maintaining a healthy diet for optimum vitamin D status warrants further investigation.
This is particularly important considering ‘stay in place’ guidance has been implemented in many densely populated cities around the world.
This measure is likely to limit people’s exposure to sunlight and thus reduce endogenous synthesis of vitamin D, potentially weakening the immune system and increasing the risk of COVID-19 infection.

##### Probiotics

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [@doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66].
Some studies suggest that probiotics are beneficial against common viral infections and there is modest evidence to suggest that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], as a result it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic value worthy of investigation against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].

**Potential Mechanisms.**
Probiotics and next-generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological-grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063].
However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions would likely differ among strains, with the ultimate effect of the probiotic depending on the heterogeneous set of bacteria present [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063].
Some of the beneficial effects of probiotics include reducing inflammation by promoting the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators, inhibiting toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4, direct competition with pathogens, the synthesis of antimicrobial substances or other metabolites, improving intestinal barrier function, and/or favorably altering the gut microbiota and the brain-gut axis [@doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2019.05.010; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063; @doi:10.1159/000342079].
However, there is also a bi-directional relationship between the lungs and gut microbiota known as the gut-lung axis [@doi:10.1038/mi.2011.55], whereby gut microbial metabolites and endotoxins may affect the lungs via the circulatory system and the lung microbiota in return may affect the gut [@doi:10.1111/cmi.12966].
Therefore, the gut-lung axis may play role in our future understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and become a target for probiotic treatments [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198018].

**Current Evidence.**
Probiotics have tentatively been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005].
Some meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075].
Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering _Bacillus subtilis_ and _Enterococcus faecalis_ [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x], _Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG_ [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC], or _Lactobacillus casei_ and _Bifidobacterium breve_ with galactooligosaccharides [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis.
These findings are supported by a recently published meta-analysis [@doi:10.4187/respcare.07097].
There is a significant risk of ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.12340496], but it can be challenging for clinicians to diagnose this infection due to the fact that severe COVID-19 infection presents with the symptoms of pneumonia [@doi:10.1186/s13054-020-03013-2].
Therefore, an effective prophylactic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia in severe COVID-19 patients would be of significant therapeutic value.

Probiotics are generally synonymous with the treatment of gastrointestinal issues due to their supposed anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10/d2qp].
Notably, gastrointestinal symptoms commonly occur in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.020], and the ACE2 receptor is highly expressed in enterocytes of the ileum and colon, suggesting that these organs may be a potential route of infection [@doi:10.1101/2020.01.30.927806; @doi:10.1038/cr.2016.152].
Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected in human feces [@doi:10/ggq8zp] and fecal-oral transmission of the virus has not yet been ruled out [@doi:10/ggpx7s].
Rectal swabs of some SARS-CoV-2 positive pediatric patients persistently tested positive for several days despite negative nasopharyngeal tests, indicating the potential for fecal viral shedding [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4].
However, there is conflicting evidence for the therapeutic value of various probiotics against the incidence or severity of gastrointestinal symptoms in viral or bacterial infections such as gastroenteritis [@doi:10.1007/s00203-017-1400-3; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1802597].
Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180].
Other studies are investigating whether probiotics may affect patient outcomes following SARS-CoV-2 infection [@clinicaltrials:NCT04390477].

**Summary.**
Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists.
In Europe, EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for EFSA or support for probiotics from researchers in the field [@doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001; @doi:10.1017/S000711451100287X; @doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66].
This is due to the hyperbolic claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous scientific data to support their efficacy.
Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive as the quality of the evidence is generally considered low [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y].
However, in the case of probiotics and respiratory infections, the evidence seems to be supportive of their potential therapeutic value.
Consequently, several investigations are underway to investigate the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19.
However, blind use of conventional probiotics for COVID-19 is cautioned against until the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is further established [@doi:10/d2qq].
Until clinical trials investigating the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19 are complete, it is not possible to provide an evidence-based recommendation for their use.

##### Nutraceutical Conclusions

Despite all the potential benefits of nutraceutical and dietary supplement interventions presented, currently there is a paucity of clinical evidence to support their use for the prevention or mitigation of COVID-19 infections.
Nevertheless, optimal nutritional status will undoubtedly prime an individual’s immune system to protect against the effects of acute respiratory viral infections by supporting normal maintenance of the immune system [@doi:10.3390/nu12041181; @doi:10.3390/nu12051466].
Nutritional strategies and the use of nutraceuticals will also undoubtedly play a role in the treatment of hospitalized patients as malnutrition is a risk to COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1038/s41430-020-0664-x].
Overall, supplementation of vitamin C, vitamin D, and zinc may be an effective method of ensuring their adequate intake to maintain optimal immune function, which may also convey beneficial effects against viral infections due to their immunomodulatory effects.
As a result, the administration of zinc, vitamin C, and vitamin D in conjunction with hydroxychloroquine are being investigated for their prophylactic effects in healthcare workers and their first-degree relatives in Turkey [@clinicaltrials:NCT04326725].
However, many supplements and nutraceuticals designed for various ailments are available in the United States and beyond that are not strictly regulated [@doi:10.1080/10408398.2019.1592107].
Indeed, there can be safety and efficacy concerns associated with many of these products.
Often, the vulnerable members of society can be exploited in this regard and unfortunately the COVID-19 pandemic is no different.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued warnings to several companies for advertising falsified claims in relation to the preventative and therapeutic capabilities of their products against COVID-19 [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-update-fda-and-ftc-warn-seven-companies-selling-fraudulent-products-claim-treat-or].
In light of these serious occurrences, it is pertinent to clarify that the nutraceuticals discussed in this review have been selected because of their possible relevance to the biological mechanisms that can beneficially affect viral and respiratory infections and because they are currently under clinical investigation.
Therefore, further intensive investigation is required to establish the effects of these nutraceuticals, if any, against COVID-19.
Until effective therapeutics are established, the most effective mitigation strategies consist of encouraging standard public health practices such as regular hand washing with soap, wearing a face mask, and covering a cough with your elbow [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/prevention.html], along with following social distancing measures, “stay in place” guidelines, expansive testing, and contact tracing [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.27.20045815; @doi:10.3201/eid2608.201093].

### Biologics

Biologics are produced from components of living organisms or viruses. They include antibodies such as the humanized monoclonal antibody
(mAb) tocilizumab (TCZ), neutralizing antibodies (nAbs), and vaccines.

#### Tocilizumab

A recent study carried out on a sample of 191 adult COVID-19 in-patients at two Wuhan hospitals found that blood samples taken at admission contained significantly higher concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in patients who ultimately deceased compared to those who survived; average concentrations of IL-6 remained higher in the deceased group than the surviving group throughout hospitalization [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
This suggests that these individuals may be experiencing a "cytokine storm", which refers to an excessive inflammatory response.
IL-6 plays a key role in this response [@doi:10.1128/mmbr.05015-11].
IL-6 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine belonging to the family of interleukins, which are immune system regulators that are primarily responsible for immune cell differentiation.
Specifically, IL-6 promotes the differentiation of activated B cells into immunoglobulin-producing plasma cells [@pmid:9052836] and acts as a growth factor for hybridoma and myeloma cells [@pmid:8431556; @pmid:2104241].
In addition, IL-6 also induces the differentiation of naïve CD4+ T cells into effector T-cell subsets [@doi:10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0022].
In this way interleukins regulate both the pro- and anti-inflammatory responses.
In this context, the observation of elevated IL-6 in patients who died may reflect an over-production of proinflammatory interleukins.

In a healthy situation the lung respiratory epithelium together with alveolar macrophages limits the activation of the immune system, ensuring homeostasis.
The introduction of the S-protein from SARS-CoV to mouse macrophages was found to increase production of IL-6 and TNF-α [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2007.02.007], and deceased SARS-CoV patients were found to have intermediate levels of IL-6, IL-1𝛽, and TNF-α expressed in a number of ACE2-expressing cell types sampled from the lung and bronchial tissues during autopsy [@doi:10.1002/path.2067].
However, other reports found the severe respiratory condition ARDS to be associated with elevated concentrations of IL-6 in BALF, but that concentrations of Tumor Necrosis Factor α (TNF-α) and IL-1𝛽 decreased with the onset of ARDS [@doi:10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013].
These cytokines enhance the pro-inflammatory reaction by increase acute-phase signaling, trafficking of immune cells to the site of primary infection, epithelial cell activation, and secondary cytokine production.
The acute phase response to infection results in the heavy damage of the endothelium of blood vessels, which disrupts the balance between the pro- and anti-inflammatory response [@doi:10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013].
Thus, the holes generated allow not just for the passage of neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes to the site of the infection but also the accumulation of liquids into the lungs, which is the ultimate cause of the death in ARDS and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) [@doi:10.1007/s00281-017-0629-x], also caused by the new coronavirus.
Recently Chinese and Italian doctors have found that Tocilizumab (TCZ), or actemra by Roche, a drug commonly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA), may palliate the most severe symptoms associated with COVID-19.

##### Anticipated Mechanism

Human IL-6 is a glycoprotein of 26 kDa that consists of 184 amino acids containing 2 potential N-glycosylation sites and four cysteine residues.
IL-6 binds to its receptor either in the insoluble (IL-6R) and soluble (sIL-6R) form.
The receptor specificity determines the type of signaling.
Specifically, the binding of IL-6 to the cell membrane receptor IL-6R gives rise to the "classical transduction of the signaling", while its binding to sIL-6R generates the so-called "trans-signaling" [@doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2012.04.001; @doi:10.1042/bj3000281].
IL-6 signaling occurs through 3 independent pathways: the Janus-activated kinase (JAK)-STAT3 pathway, the Ras/Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases (MAPK) pathway and the Phosphoinositol-3 Kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
The ultimate result of the IL-6 cascade is to direct transcriptional activity of various promoters of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1 and TFN, including IL-6 own regulation through the activity of NF-κB [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604].
Particularly, IL-6 synthesis is tightly regulated both transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally.
In this context, it has been shown that viral proteins can enhance transcription of the IL-6 gene, via strengthening the DNA-binding activity between several transcription factors and IL-6 gene-cis-regulatory elements [@doi:10.2492/inflammregen.33.054].
TCZ is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds both to the insoluble and soluble receptor of IL-6, de facto inhibiting the IL-6 immune cascade.

**Current Evidence.**
Chinese doctors have started a trial enrolling 188 patients of which 14 with severe lung disease have shown clear signs of improvements, according to their results [@url:https://www.genengnews.com/virology/coronavirus/genentech-launches-phase-iii-trial-of-actemra-as-coronavirus-treatment/].
Also, AIFA (the Italian Drug Agency) approved the start of a new trial on March 19 recruiting patients at the initial stage of the infection [@url:https://www.univadis.co.uk/viewarticle/covid-19-italy-launches-an-independent-trial-on-tocilizumab-715741].
In addition to these independent trials, Roche, in collaboration with the FDA, will start a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial in early April.
The trial will enroll 330 patients globally, which will be followed for 60 days upon use of the drug via injection to analyze its efficiency/safety [@url:https://www.biopharma-reporter.com/Article/2020/03/19/Roche-enters-Phase-III-for-COVID-19-treatment].
However, previous studies of RA showed that the rate of incident infections in clinical practice patients treated with TCZ was higher than the rate observed during clinical trial [@doi:10.1093/rheumatology/ker223].
Also, RA patients with chronic hepatitis B (HB) infection showed high risk of HB virus reactivation upon TCZ administration in combination with other RA drugs [@doi:10.1111/1756-185X.13010].
These last findings highlight the need to search for a balance between impairing a harmful immune response, such as the one generated by the cytokine storm, and preventing the worsening of the clinical picture of the patients by potential new viral infections.
This aspect should be investigated further in upcoming trials.

Perhaps, the TCZ treatment would best suit patients with severely compromised lungs due to the COVID-19 infection and are therefore at greater risk of death, in order to stop the uncontrolled immune response before it’s too late.

**Summary.**
On April 29, 2020 UC San Diego Health started phase III clinical trial to establish whether TCZ, a drug commonly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and similar diseases, also has therapeutic effect on COVID-19 patients [@url:https://ucsdnews.ucsd.edu/pressrelease/arthritis-drug-presents-promise-as-treatment-for-covid-19-pneumonia].
Approximately 25% of coronavirus patients develop ARDS, which is caused by an excessive early response of the immune system also known as the cytokine storm [@doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3].
This overwhelming inflammation is triggered by IL-6.
TCZ is an inhibitor of IL-6 and therefore may be able to neutralize the inflammatory pathway that leads to the cytokine storm.
According to the health commission of China, TCZ can be used in patients with high concentration of IL-6 in their plasma (greater than 20 pg/ml) or with extensive lung damage.
The recommended dose is 400mg of TCZ diluted to 100 ml with 0.9% normal saline (NaCl).
Patients who developed a fever within 12 hours or for whom the initial dose showed poor efficacy were administered an additional dose [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2005615117; @doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3].
It is important to note that TCZ is contraindicated in patients with active infections such as tuberculosis [@doi:10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3], though a recent study shows that the drug is safe for pregnant and breastfeeding women [@doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kez100].


#### Neutralizing Antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases.
As a result, they have become some of the best-selling drugs in the pharmaceutical market in recent years [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z].
There are currently 79 FDA approved mAbs on the market including antibodies for viral infections (e.g. Ibalizumab for HIV and Palivizumab for RSV) [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z; @doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095916].
For that reason, neutralizing antibodies have emerged to address these shortcomings.
Virus-specific neutralizing antibodies commonly target viral surface glycoproteins or host structures, thereby inhibiting viral entry through receptor binding interference [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02323; @doi:10.1080/21645515.2017.1337614].
This section discusses current efforts in developing neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 and how expertise gained from previous approaches for MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV may benefit antibody development.

##### Spike (S) Neutralizing Antibody

During the first SARS epidemic in 2002, nAbs were found in SARS-CoV infected patients [@doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2004.01009.x;@doi:10.1086/423286].
Several studies following up on these findings identified various S glycoprotein epitopes as the major targets of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755].
The passive transfer of immune serum containing nAbs from SARS-CoV-infected mice resulted in protection of naïve mice from viral lower respiratory tract infection upon intranasal challenge [@doi:10.1128/jvi.78.7.3572-3577.2004].
Similarly, a meta-analysis suggested that administration of plasma from recovered SARS-CoV patients reduced mortality upon SARS-CoV infection [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiu396].

Similar results have been observed for MERS-CoV infections, which emerged as the second coronavirus-related epidemic.
Neutralizing antibodies have been identified against various epitopes of the RBD of the S glycoprotein [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1402074111; doi:10.1128/JVI.00912-14].

**Anticipated Mechanisms.**
Coronaviruses use trimeric spike (S) glycoproteins on their surface to bind to host cell receptors, such as ACE2, allowing for cell entry [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058].
Each S glycoprotein protomer is comprised of an S1 domain, also called the receptor binding domain (RBD), and an S2 domain.
The S1 domain binds to host cell receptors while the S2 domain facilitates the fusion between the viral envelope and host cell membranes [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755].
Although targeting of the host cell receptor ACE2 shows efficacy in inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 infection [@doi:10.1038/nature02145], given the physiological relevance of ACE2 [@doi:10/bsbp49], it would be favorable to target virus-specific structures rather than host receptors.
This forms the rationale of developing neutralizing antibodies against the S glycoprotein, disrupting its interaction with ACE2 and other receptors and thereby inhibiting viral entry.

**Current Evidence.**
The first human neutralizing antibody against SARS-CoV-2 targeting the trimeric spike (S) glycoproteins has been developed using hybridoma technology, [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958], where antibody-producing B-cells developed by mice can be inserted into myeloma cells to produce a hybrid cell line (the hybridoma) that is grown in culture.
The 47D11 clone was able to cross-neutralize SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2 by a mechanism that is different from receptor binding interference.
The exact mechanism of how this clone neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and inhibits infection in vitro remains unknown, but a potential mechanism might be antibody induced destabilization of the membrane prefusion structure [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.028].
The ability of this antibody to prevent infection at a feasible dose needs to be validated in vivo, especially since in vitro neutralization effects have been shown to not be reflective of in vivo efficacy [@doi:10.1128/JVI.01603-17].
Only a week later, a different group successfully isolated multiple nAbs targeting the RBD of the S glycoprotein from blood samples taken from COVID-19 patients in China [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.990770].
Interestingly, the patient isolated antibodies did not cross-react with RBDs from SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, although cross-reactivity to the trimeric spike proteins of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV was observed.
This suggests that the RBDs between the three coronavirus species are immunologically distinct and that the isolated nAbs targeting the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 are species specific.
While this specificity is desirable, it also raises the question of whether these antibodies are more susceptible to viral escape mechanisms.
Viral escape is a common resistance mechanism to nAbs therapy due to selective pressure from neutralizing antibodies [@doi:10.2217/imt.15.33; @doi:10.1126/science.1213256].
For HIV, broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) targeting the CD4 binding site (CD4bs) show greater neutralization breadth than monoclonal antibodies, which target only specific HIV strains [@doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2019.01.007].
For MERS-CoV, a combination of multiple neutralizing antibodies targeting different antigenic sites prevented neutralization escape [@doi:10.1128/JVI.02002-17].
It was found that the different antibody isolates did not target the same epitopes, suggesting that using them in combination might produce a synergistic effect that prevents viral escape [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.990770].
It was also demonstrated that binding affinity of the antibodies does not reflect their capability to compete with ACE2 binding.
Furthermore, no conclusions about correlations between the severity of disease and the ability to produce neutralizing antibodies can be drawn at this point.
Rather, higher neutralizing antibody titers were more frequently found in patients with severe disease.
Correspondingly, higher levels of anti-spike IgG were observed in patients that deceased from infection compared to patient that recovered [@doi:10.1172/jci.insight.123158].

**Summary.**

Results from the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV epidemics can provide valuable lessons for the design of neutralizing antibodies for the current outbreak.
The findings for SARS-CoV and MERS can aid in identifying which structures constitute suitable targets for nAbs, despite the fact that the RBD appears to be distinct between the three coronavirus species.
These studies also suggest that a combination of nAbs targeting distinct antigens might be necessary to provide protection [@doi:10.1128/JVI.02002-17].
The biggest challenge remains identifying antibodies that not only bind to their target, but also prove to be beneficial for disease management.
On that note, a recently published study indicates that anti-spike antibodies could make the disease worse rather than eliminating the virus [@doi:10.1172/jci.insight.123158].
These findings underscores our current lack of understanding the full immune response to SARS-CoV-2.

<!-- Use the format below to add additional sections
**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Why it may be useful

**Current Evidence.**
A list of current studies and their results, using carefully the information requested in the therapeutic paper tickets.

**Summary.**
Summarize the state of the neutralizing antibody approach.
-->

#### Interferons

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of cytokines crucial to activate the first (innate) immune system response against viral infections.
Interferons are classified into three categories based on their receptor specificity: type I, II and III [@doi:10.1128/mmbr.05015-11].
Specifically, IFNs I (IFN-𝛼 and 𝛽) and II (IFN-𝛾) induce the expression of antiviral proteins that bring the viral RNA to degradation [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2003.11.013].
Among these IFNs, IFN-𝛽 has already been found to strongly inhibit the replication of other coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV, in cell culture, while IFN-𝛼 and 𝛾 were shown to be less effective in this context [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2003.11.013].
There is evidence that patients with higher susceptibility to ARDS indeed show deficiency in IFN- 𝛽.
For instance, infection with other coronaviruses impairs IFN-𝛽 expression and synthesis, allowing the virus to escape the innate immune response [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.024].

On March 18 2020 Synairgen plc has received approval to start a phase II trial for SNG001, an IFN-𝛽-1a formulation to be delivered to the lungs via inhalation.
SNG001 was already shown to be effective reducing viral load in swine flu in vivo model, as well as it has been shown to be effective in the protection from other Corona virus infection in vitro (Synairgen plc, press release).

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Why it may be useful

**Current Evidence.**

A list of current studies and their results, using carefully the information requested in the therapeutic paper tickets.

**Summary.**
Summarize the state of interferons.

#### Vaccines

##### Strategies for and challenges to vaccine development

Today, the first step in producing a vaccine often is characterizing the target.
The genetic sequence of SARS-CoV-2 was published on January 11, 2020, which aided the global effort to develop a vaccine to prevent COVID-19.
The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) is coordinating global health agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.
As of April 8, 2020, there were 115 vaccine candidates to prevent COVID-19, of which 78 were active.
Of the 78 active vaccine programs, 73 were in the preclinical or exploratory stage [@doi:10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5].


Historically, an H1N1 influenza vaccine was developed relatively efficiently, mainly because influenza-vaccine technology had already been developed and regulatory agencies had already decided that vaccines produced using egg- and cell-based platforms could be licensed under the regulations used for a strain change.
Critiques of the experience producing and distributing the H1N1 vaccine have stressed the need for alternative development-and-manufacturing platforms that can be readily adapted to new pathogens.
Although a monovalent H1N1 vaccine was not available before the pandemic peaked in the United States and Europe, it was available soon afterward as a stand-alone vaccine that was eventually incorporated into the commercially available seasonal influenza vaccines [@doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005630].
If H1N1 vaccine development provides any indication, considering developing and manufacturing platforms for promising COVID-19 vaccine trials early could hasten the emergence of an effective prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.

Unlike many global vaccine development programs previously, such as with H1N1, the vaccine development landscape for COVID-19 includes vaccines produced by a wide array of technologies.
Experience in the field of oncology is encouraging COVID-19 vaccine developers to use next-generation approaches to vaccine development, which have led to the great diversity of vaccine development programs [@url:https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/newer-vaccine-technologies-deployed-to-develop-covid-19-shot-67152].
Diverse technology platforms include DNA, RNA, virus-like particle, recombinant protein, both replicating and non-replicating viral vectors, live attenuated virus, and inactivated virus approaches.
Given the wide range of vaccines under development, it is possible that some vaccine products may eventually be shown to be more effective in certain subpopulations, such as children, pregnant women, immunocompromised patients, the elderly, etc.
The requirements for a successful vaccine trial and deployment are complex and may require coordination between government, industry, academia, and philanthropic entities [@doi:10.1126/science.abc5312].

###### DNA Vaccines

This vaccination method involves the direct introduction of a plasmid containing a DNA sequence encoding the antigen(s) against which an immune response is sought into appropriate tissues [@url:https://www.who.int/biologicals/areas/vaccines/dna/en/].

**Anticipated Mechanism.**
This approach may offer several advantages over traditional vaccination approaches, such as the stimulation of both B- as well as T-cell responses and the absence of any infectious agent.

**Current Evidence.**
Currently, a Phase I safety and immunogenicity clinical trial of INO-4800, a prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, is underway [@clinicaltrials:NCT04336410].
The vaccine developer Inovio Pharmaceuticals Technology is overseeing administration of INO-4800 by intradermal injection followed by electroporation with the CELLECTRA® device to healthy volunteers.
Electroporation is the application of brief electric pulses to tissues in order to permeabilize cell membranes in a transient and reversible manner.
It has been shown that electroporation can enhance vaccine efficacy by up to 100-fold, as measured by increases in antigen-specific antibody titers [@doi:10.1016/j.coi.2011.03.008].
The safety of the CELLECTRA® device has been studied for over seven years, and these studies support the further development of electroporation as a safe vaccine delivery method [@doi:10.4161/hv.24702].
The temporary formation of pores through electroporation facilitates the successful transportation of macromolecules into cells, allowing cells to robustly take up INO-4800 for the production of an antibody response.

Approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on April 6, 2020, the Phase I study is enrolling up to 40 healthy adult volunteers in Philadelphia, PA at the Perelman School of Medicine and at the Center for Pharmaceutical Research in Kansas City, MO.
The trial has two experimental arms corresponding to the two locations.
Participants in Experimental Group 1 will receive one intradermal injection of 1.0 milligram (mg) of INO-4800 followed by electroporation using the CELLECTRA® 2000 device twice, administered at Day 0 and Week 4.
Participants in Experimental Group 2 will receive two intradermal injections of 1.0 mg (total 2.0 mg per dosing visit) of INO-4800 followed by electroporation using the CELLECTRA® 2000 device, administered at Day 0 and Week 4.
Safety data and the initial immune responses of participants from the trial are expected by the end of the summer of 2020.

**Summary.**
The development of a DNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 by Inovio could be an important step forward in the world's search for a COVID-19 vaccine.
Although exciting, the cost of vaccine manufacturing and electroporation may make scaling the use of this technology for prophylactic use for the general public difficult.

###### RNA Vaccines

RNA vaccines are nucleic-acid based modalities that code for viral antigens against which the human body elicits a humoral and cellular immune response.
The mRNA technology is transcribed _in vitro_ and delivered to cells via lipid nanoparticles (LNP).
They are recognized by ribosomes _in vivo_ and then translated and modified into functional proteins [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
The resulting intracellular viral proteins are displayed on surface MHC proteins, provoking a strong CD8+ T cell response as well as a CD4+ T cell and B cell-associated antibody responses [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].

Naturally, mRNA is not very stable and can degrade quickly in the extracellular environment or the cytoplasm.
The LNP covering protects the mRNA from enzymatic degradation outside of the cell [@doi:10.4155/tde-2016-0006].
Codon optimization to prevent secondary structure formation and modifications of the poly-A tail as well as the 5’ untranslated region to promote ribosomal complex binding can increase mRNA expression in cells.
Furthermore, purifying out dsRNA and immature RNA with FPLC (fast performance liquid chromatography) and HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography) technology will improve translation of the mRNA in the cell [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594; @doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].

mRNA vaccines confer many advantages over traditional viral vectored vaccines and DNA vaccines.
In comparison to live attenuated viruses, mRNA vaccines are non-infectious and can be synthetically produced in an egg-free, cell-free environment, thereby reducing the risk of a detrimental immune response in the host [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.03.007].
Unlike DNA vaccines, mRNA technologies are naturally degradable and non-integrating, and they do not need to cross the nuclear membrane in addition to the plasma membrane for their effects to be seen [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
Furthermore, mRNA vaccines are easily, affordably, and rapidly scalable.

Although mRNA vaccines have been developed for therapeutic and prophylactic purposes, none have been licensed or commercialized thus far.
Nevertheless, they have shown promise in animal models and preliminary clinical trials for several indications, including rabies, coronavirus, influenza, and cytomegalovirus [@clinicaltrials:NCT01669096].
Preclinical data from Pardi et al. identified effective antibody generation against full-length FPLC-purified influenza hemagglutinin stalk-encoding mRNA in mice, rabbits, and ferrets [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05482-0].
Similar immunological responses for mRNA vaccines were observed in humans in Phase I and II clinical trials operated by the pharmaceutical-development companies Curevac and Moderna for rabies, flu, and zika [@doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].


**Anticipated Mechanism.**
Positively charged bilayer LNPs carrying the mRNA attract negatively charged cell membranes, endocytose into the cytoplasm [@doi:10.4155/tde-2016-0006], and facilitate endosomal escape.
LNPs can be coated with modalities recognized and engulfed by specific cell types.
LNPs 150nm or less effectively enter into lymphatic vessels.

There are three types of RNA vaccines: non-replicating, _in vivo_ self-replicating, and _in vitro_ dendritic cell non-replicating [@url:https://www.phgfoundation.org/briefing/rna-vaccines].
Non-replicating mRNA vaccines consist of a simple open reading frame (ORF) for the viral antigen flanked by the 5’ UTR and 3’ poly-A tail.
_In vivo_ self-replicating vaccines encode a modified viral genome derived from single-stranded, positive sense RNA alphaviruses [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594; @doi:10.1080/14760584.2017.1355245].
The RNA genome encodes the viral antigen along with proteins of the genome replication machinery, including an RNA polymerase.
Structural proteins required for viral assembly are not included in the engineered genome [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594].
Self-replicating vaccines produce more viral antigens over a longer period of time, thereby evoking a more robust immune response [@url:https://www.phgfoundation.org/briefing/rna-vaccines].
Finally, _in vitro_ dendritic cell non-replicating RNA vaccines limit transfection to dendritic cells.
Dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting immune cells that easily take up mRNA and present fragments of the translated peptide on their MHC proteins, which can then interact with T cell receptors.
Ultimately, primed T follicular helper cells can stimulate germinal center B cells that also present the viral antigen to produce antibodies against the virus [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.10.004].
These cells are isolated from the patient, grown and transfected _ex vivo_, and reintroduced to the patient [@doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.243].


**Current Evidence.**
mRNA-1273 is the first COVID-19 vaccine to enter a phase I clinical in the United States.
ModernaTX, Inc. is currently spearheading an investigation on the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of mRNA-1273, a conventional lipid nanoparticle encapsulated RNA encoding a full-length prefusion stabilized spike (S) protein for SARS-CoV-2 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04283461].
Forty-five participants will be enrolled in the study and given an intramuscular injection of mRNA-1273 in their deltoid muscle on Day 1 and Day 29, and then followed for the next twelve months.
Healthy males and non-pregnant females aged 18-55 years are being recruited and will be divided in three dosage groups receiving either 25 micrograms, 100 mcg, or 250 mcg of the vaccine.

The study started on March 3rd, 2020, and is expected to complete by June 1st, 2021.
Emory Vaccine Center and Kaiser Permanent Washington Health Research Institute are currently recruiting participants with NIH Clinical Center expecting to recruit soon.
Reports on patient safety and reactogenicity will be recorded soon.
IgG ELISA assays on patient serology samples will study the immunogenicity of the vaccine [@clinicaltrials:NCT04283461].

**Summary.**
mRNA vaccines are promising tools in the prevention and control of pandemics.
mRNA-1273 is the only RNA vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 currently being tested in clinical trials and results are expected soon.

###### Viral Particle Vaccines

Brief background on the therapeutic.

<!--##### Anticipated Mechanism

Why it may be useful

**Current Evidence.**
A list of current studies and their results, using carefully the information requested in the therapeutic paper tickets.

**Summary.**
Summarize the state of the vaccine approach.
-->
##### Oligonucleotide Therapies

Add background and other information below

<!--##### Anticipated Mechanism

Why it may be useful

**Current Evidence.**
A list of current studies and their results, using carefully the information requested in the therapeutic paper tickets.

**Summary.**
Summarize the state of the neutralizing antibody approach.
-->

##### Adjuvants for Vaccines

Adjuvants include a variety of molecules or larger microbial-related products which sometimes are or include immunostimulants or immunomodulators or more generally have an effect on the immune system or immune responses of interest.
Adjuvants are sometimes included within vaccines, especially vaccines other than live attenuated and inactivated viruses, in order to enhance the immune response.
A review on the development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines [@doi:10.3390/vaccines8020153] also included a brief summary of considerations for adjuvants to research for the vaccines including a brief description of some already commonly used adjuvants.
Different adjuvants can regulate different types of immune responses, so the type of adjuvant or combination of adjuvants for use in a vaccine depends on the type of vaccine and the research into what works with respect to efficacy and safety.
A variety of possible mechanisms for adjuvants have been researched [@doi:10.1038/nri2510; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.02619; @doi:10.3390/vaccines8010128] including the following: induction of DAMPs (damage-associated molecular patterns) which can be recognized by certain pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system; being or including or functioning as PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular patterns) which can also be recognized by certain pattern recognition receptors (PRRs); and more generally enhancing humoral or cellular immune responses.
When choosing an adjuvant or combination of adjuvants, considerations include promotion of advantageous effects of the components and immune response and avoiding or inhibition of possible deleterious effects of the components and immune response.
There are also considerations, technologies, and research into the effects of different ways to deliver (or co-deliver or combine) the adjuvant and antigen components of a vaccine.

### Underexplored Therapeutics

The majority of current clinical trials and lines of investigation have focused on repurposing existing therapies to counter SARS-CoV-2 and treat its symptoms.
This is necessary given the urgency of the situation as well as the extensive time required for developing and testing new therapies.
However, in the long-term, new drugs specific for treatment of COVID-19 may also enter development.
There is thus value in investigating two lines of inquiry for treatment of COVID-19: 1) new therapeutics specific for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms, and 2) repurposing of existing therapeutics for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms.
Here we consider further avenues that scientific investigators may explore in the development of therapies for COVID-19.

Given the great focus in investigating hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) as a potential antiviral treatment for SARS-CoV-2, it may be of interest to researchers to explore related alternatives.
For example, hydroxyferroquine derivatives of HCQ have been described as a class of bioorganometallic compounds that exert antiviral effects with some selectivity for SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1021/jm0601856].
Future work could explore whether these compounds exert antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2 and whether they are safe for use in animals and humans.

The tocilizumab trial described in an above section [@doi:10/ggnxb3] studies the possibility of using an anti-inflammatory agent typically used for the treatment of autoimmune disease to counter the effects of the “cytokine storm” induced by the virus.
Another anti-IL-6 antibody, sarilumab, is also being investigated [@url:http://www.news.sanofi.us/2020-03-16-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-begin-global-Kevzara-R-sarilumab-clinical-trial-program-in-patients-with-severe-COVID-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04327388].
Typically, immunosuppressive drugs such as these are contraindicated in the setting of infection [@doi:10.1177/2040622313485275].
However, COVID-19 results in hyperinflammation that appears to contribute to mortality via lung damage, suggesting that immunosuppression may be a helpful approach to treatment [@doi:10/ggnzmc].
The decision of whether and/or when to counter hyperinflammation with immunosuppression in the setting of COVID-19 remains in debate as the risks of inhibiting antiviral immunity continue to be weighed against the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects [@doi:10/ggq8hs].
If the need to curtail the “cytokine storm” inflammatory response to the virus transcends the risks of immunosuppression, exploration of more anti-inflammatory agents may be warranted; these agents are considered here.
While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-alpha. Inhibition of TNF-alpha by an inhibitor such as Etanercept has been previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1185/030079903125002757] and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well.
Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the JAK kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10/dph5].
Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10/ggnrsx].
Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04320277].
Identification and targeting of further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.
Lastly, it is also worth noting the high costs of tocilizumab therapy and other biologics: at doses used for rheumatoid arthritis patients, the cost for tocilizumab ranges from $179.20 to $896 per dose for the IV form and $355 for the pre-filled syringe [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349513/table/T43/].
Cyclosporine may be a more cost-effective and readily-available alternative than biologics [@url:https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/meyers_pp/385], if it proves effective against the cytokine storm induced by SARS-CoV-2.

Another approach is the development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted to SARS-CoV-2.
Given the increasingly apparent role of the cytokine storm in disease pathogenesis, it is possible that antivirals could be less effective in more severe cases of COVID-19, but this is not yet known; regardless, it is likely that early-stage patients could benefit from antiviral therapy.
The potential for remdesivir as an antiviral has already been described in an above section.
Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet been approved for human coronaviruses.
Intriguing new options are emerging, however.
Beta-D-N4-hydroxycytidine (NHC) is an orally bioavailable ribonucleotide analog showing broad-spectrum activity against RNA viruses, which may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abb5883].
Various other antivirals are in development.
Development of antivirals will be further facilitated as research reveals more information about the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell and host cell genome, mechanisms of viral replication, mechanisms of viral assembly, and mechanisms of viral release to other cells; this can allow researchers to target specific stages and structures of the viral life cycle.

Antibodies against viruses, also known as antiviral monoclonal antibodies, could be an alternative as well and are described in detail in an above section.
The goal of antiviral antibodies is to neutralize viruses through either cell-killing activity or blocking of viral replication [@doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.005].
They may also engage the host immune response, encouraging the immune system to hone in on the virus.
Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.
Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

There is also some research into possible potential therapeutics or prophylactics which interact with components of the innate immune response.
For example, there are a variety of toll-like receptors (TLRs) which are examples of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), innate immune response components which recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
Note that TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses [@ISBN:9780815332183].
In mouse models, poly(I:C) and lipopolysaccharide, which are agonists of toll-like receptors TLR3 and TLR4, respectively, showed protective effects when administered prior to SARS-CoV exposure [@doi:10.1128/JVI.01410-12].
Therefore, TLR agonists and antagonists hold some potential for broad-spectrum prophylaxis.
Another type of approach which is being investigated is the possible use of what is termed trained immunity, in particular as elicited by non-SARS-CoV-2 whole-microorganism vaccines (or other microbial stimuli), as a tool which might be shown to generate heterologous protective effects with respect to SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility or severity [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042].
In a recent review [@doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0285-6], trained immunity was defined as forms of memory which are temporary (e.g., months or years, and reversible), displayed by innate immune cells and innate immune features of other cells, displayed as increased responsiveness to future same or heterologous pathogen infection or sometimes decreased responsiveness or immunological tolerance, and established through epigenetic and metabolic mechanisms.
One type of stimulus which research indicates can induce trained immunity is bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccination.
BCG is an attenuated form of bacteria _Mycobacterium bovis_.
The vaccine is most commonly administered for the prevention of tuberculosis in humans.
With respect to SARS-CoV-2 specifically, clinical trials in non-SARS-CoV-2-infected adults have been setup to assess the possible efficacy of BCG vaccination -- e.g., to assess if it may be effective as a potential prophylactic or potential partial prophylactic in (1) reducing susceptibility / preventing infection and (2) reducing disease severity (for descriptions of trials with BCG vaccine or the related vaccine VPM1002, see [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @clinicaltrials:NCT04327206; @clinicaltrials:NCT04328441; @clinicaltrials:NCT04348370; @clinicaltrials:NCT04350931; @clinicaltrials:NCT04362124; @clinicaltrials:NCT04369794; @clinicaltrials:NCT04373291; @clinicaltrials:NCT04379336; @clinicaltrials:NCT04384549; @clinicaltrials:NCT04387409; @clinicaltrials:NCT04414267; @clinicaltrials:NCT04417335; @clinicaltrials:NCT04435379; @clinicaltrials:NCT04439045]).
Some trials enroll healthcare workers, other trials hospitalized elderly adults without immunosuppression who get vaccinated with placebo or BCG at hospital discharge, and yet another set of trials older adults (>50 years) under chronic care for conditions like hypertension and diabetes.
One set of trials, for example, uses time until first infection as the primary study endpoint; more generally, outcomes measured in some of these trials are related to incidence of disease and disease severity or symptoms.
An article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] that very briefly summarizes the setup of these trials also mentions some data analyses which showed possible correlations between countries which have more BCG vaccination (or BCG vaccination policies) and the severity of COVID-19 in those countries, but (1) it is unclear whether this correlation indicates an interaction because for example of many other possible factors or confounding factors (country age distribution, detection efficiency, stochastic epidemic dynamic effects, differences in healthcare capacity over time in relation to epidemic dynamics, and various other factors) and (2) also it is unclear what is the relation between BCG vaccination at different ages and at longer times before the start of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic and BCG vaccination at different ages during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic at shorter times before the risk of possible infection; at least some of these considerations are also made or pointed out in the data analyses sited and in the article.
The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] also includes various related considerations such as efficacy in related animal and human studies and the safety of the vaccine, both generally and specifically with respect to SARS-CoV-2.
Additionally, we review here one of the most important considerations: severe SARS-CoV-2 has been characterized so far to possibly exhibit dysregulated immune responses and whether or when some immune responses are protective or pathogenic is still under research (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]); also, trained immunity itself may sometimes be related to either balanced, or too much or too little, or useful or harmful immunological responses.
The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] proposes that trained immunity might lead to an earlier stronger response which could reduce viremia and avoid (possibly with the additional support of another therapeutic administered later) the later detrimental immunopathology seen with severe cases; while this is a possibility, additional research is required to assess its validity.

In the longer term, as more information becomes available about the structures of SARS-CoV-2 components, small molecule inhibitors of those components may become candidates for drug discovery.
For example, crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease have recently been resolved [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882; @url:https://www.diamond.ac.uk/covid-19/for-scientists/Main-protease-structure-and-XChem.html].
Efforts have already been in place to perform screens for small molecule inhibitors of the main protease, yielding potential hits [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882].
Much work remains to be done to determine further crystal structures of other viral components, understand the relative utility of targeting different viral components, perform additional small molecule inhibitor screens, and determine the safety and efficacy of the potential inhibitors.
While still nascent, work in this area is promising.
