## Discussion

As of October 2020 the SARS-CoV-2 virus remains a serious worldwide threat.
The scientific community has responded by rapidly collecting and disseminating information about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the associated illness, COVID-19.
The rapid identification of the genomic sequence of the virus allowed for early contextualization of SARS-CoV-2 among other known respiratory viruses.
The pathogen is a coronavirus that is closely related to SARS-CoV, which caused the SARS pandemics of the early 2000s.
Knowing the phylogenetic context and genomic sequence of the virus then allowed for rapid insights into its structure and pathogenesis.
As with other HCoV, the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is likely driven by detection of its spike protein, which allows it to enter cells through the ACE2 receptor.
Epithelial cells have also emerged as the major cellular target of the virus, contextualizing the respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms that are frequently observed in COVID-19.
However, as COVID-19 cases have been more widely characterized, it has become clear that the disease presentation is highly heterogeneous.
Many cases, especially in younger adults, present with mild symptoms or even asymptomatically, while others, especially in older adults, can be severe or fatal.
In children, the SARS-CoV-2 virus can present as two distinct diseases, COVID-19 or MIS-C.
While the overall infection fatality rate remains unknown, estimates suggest that it is not more than 1%; however, the severity of many non-lethal cases makes COVID-19 an ongoing, significant concern.

Characterizing the rate of infection and fatality rates hinges on the availability of rapid and accurate diagnostic testing.
Major advancements have been made in identifying diagnostic approaches.
The development of diagnostic technologies have been rapid, beginning with the release of the SARS-CoV-2 viral genome sequence in January.
As of October 2020, a range of diagnostic tests have become available.
One class of tests uses PCR (RT-PCR or qRT-PCR) to assess the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA, while another typically uses ELISA to test for the presence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
The former approach is useful for identifying active infections, while the latter measures hallmarks of the immune response and therefore can detect either active infections or immunity gained from prior infection.
Combining these tests leads to extremely accurate detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection (98.6%), but when used alone, PCR-based tests are recommended before 5.5 days after the onset of the illness and antibody tests after 5.5 days [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8259].
Other strategies for testing can also influence the tests' accuracy, such as the use of nasopharyngeal swabs versus BALF [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8259], which allow for trade-offs between patient's comfort and test sensitivity.
Additionally, technologies such as digital PCR may allow for scale-up in the throughput of diagnostic testing, facilitating widespread testing.
One major question that remains is whether people who recover from SARS-CoV-2 develop sustained immunity, and over what period this immunity is expected to last.
Some reports have suggested that some patients may develop COVID-19 reinfections (e.g., [@doi:10/ghfgkt]), but the rates of reinfection are currently unknown.
Serologic testing combined with PCR testing will be critical to confirming purported cases of reinfection and to identifying the duration over which immunity is retained and to understanding reinfection risks.

One of the goals of characterizing the immune response is to identify strategies for the prophylactic enhancements of immunity.
Though some concerns remain about the duration of sustained immunity for convalescents, vaccine development efforts are ongoing and show initial promising results.
The Moderna trial, for example, reported that the neutralizing activity in participants who received two doses of the vaccine was similar to that observed in convalescent plasma.
Vaccine development for COVID-19 is progressing rapidly compared to typical timelines, but vaccine development is still a lengthy process.
In the meantime, some advances have also been made in the treatment of patients with COVID-19.
As cases have become better characterized, it has become evident that many patients experience an initial immune response to the virus that is typically characterized by fever, cough, dyspnea, and related symptoms.
However, the most serious concern is cytokine release syndrome, when the body's immune response becomes dysregulated, resulting in an extreme inflammatory response.
The RECOVERY trial, a large-scale, multi-arm trial enrolling about 15% of all COVID-19 patients in the United Kingdom, was the first to identify that the widely available steroid dexamethasone seems to be beneficial for patients suffering from this immune dysregulation [@doi:10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273].
Efforts to identify therapeutic treatments to treat patients early in the course of infection have been more ambiguous.
Early interest in the drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine yielded no promising results from studies with robust experimental designs.
The experimental drug remdesivir, which was developed for ebola, has received enough support from early analyses to receive FDA approval, but results have been mixed.
The potential for other drugs, such as tocilizumab, to reduce recovery time remains unclear, but some early results were promising.

### Additional Therapeutics of Interest

Given what is currently known about these therapeutics for COVID-19, a number of related therapies beyond those explored above may also prove to be of interest.
For example, the demonstrated benefit of dexamethasone and the ongoing potential of tocilizumab for treatment of COVID-19 suggests that other anti-inflammatory agents might also hold value for the treatment of COVID-19.
Given that current evidence about treating COVID-19 with dexamethasone suggests that the need to curtail the cytokine storm inflammatory response to the virus can transcend the risks of immunosuppression, exploration of more anti-inflammatory agents may be warranted.
While dexamethasone is considered widely available and generally affordable, the high costs of biologics such as tocilizumab therapy may present obstacles to wide-scale distribution of this drug if it proves of value.
At the doses used for rheumatoid arthritis patients, the cost for tocilizumab ranges from $179.20 to $896 per dose for the IV form and $355 for the pre-filled syringe [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349513/table/T43/].
There are several anti-inflammatory agents used for the treatment of autoimmune diseases that may also be able to counter the effects of the cytokine storm induced by the virus, some of which, such as cyclosporine, are likely to be more cost-effective and readily available than biologics [@url:https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/meyers_pp/385].
While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-alpha.
Inhibition of TNF-alpha by an inhibitor such as Etanercept has been previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1185/030079903125002757] and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well.
Another anti-IL-6 antibody, sarilumab, is also being investigated [@url:http://www.news.sanofi.us/2020-03-16-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-begin-global-Kevzara-R-sarilumab-clinical-trial-program-in-patients-with-severe-COVID-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04327388].
Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the JAK kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10/dph5].
Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10/ggnrsx].
Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @clinicaltrials:NCT04320277].
Identification and targeting of further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.

In addition to immunosuppressive treatments that are most beneficial late in disease progression, much research is focused on identifying treatments would be likely to benefit early-stage patients.
For example, although studies of hydroxychloroquine have not supported the early theory-driven interest in this antiviral treatment, alternative compounds with related mechanisms may still have potential.
Hydroxyferroquine derivatives of HCQ have been described as a class of bioorganometallic compounds that exert antiviral effects with some selectivity for SARS-CoV _in vitro_ [@doi:10.1021/jm0601856].
Future work could explore whether such compounds exert antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2 and whether they would be safer for use in COVID-19.
Another potential approach is the development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted to SARS-CoV-2.
Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet been approved for human coronaviruses.
Intriguing new options are emerging, however.
Beta-D-N4-hydroxycytidine (NHC) is an orally bioavailable ribonucleotide analog showing broad-spectrum activity against RNA viruses, which may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ in mouse models of HCoVs [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abb5883].
A range of other antivirals are also in development.
Development of antivirals will be further facilitated as research reveals more information about the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell and host cell genome, mechanisms of viral replication, mechanisms of viral assembly, and mechanisms of viral release to other cells; this can allow researchers to target specific stages and structures of the viral life cycle.
Many researchers have also focused their attention to the potential use of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals.
Indeed, there has been recent interest for the potential use of vitamin D as a prophylactic and therapeutic agent against COVID-19 as several observational studies have linked low vitamin D status to its incidence [@doi:10.1111/joim.13149; @doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.19722]. 
These associations have yet to be confirmed and rigorous trials are required before considering supplementation recommendations.
However, the nutritional status and general health of a patient can affect their outcomes in various diseases, thus it would be pertinent to advise people to follow a healthy diet and life style to the best of their ability to prevent nutrient deficiencies and insufficiencies and to maintain a healthy immune system [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmaa125].
Finally, antibodies against viruses, also known as antiviral monoclonal antibodies, could be an alternative as well and are described in detail in an above section.
The goal of antiviral antibodies is to neutralize viruses through either cell-killing activity or blocking of viral replication [@doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.005].
They may also engage the host immune response, encouraging the immune system to hone in on the virus.
Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.
Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

Some research is also investigating potential therapeutics and prophylactics that would interact with components of the innate immune response.
For example, there are a variety of TLRs, pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses [@ISBN:9780815332183].
In mouse models, poly(I:C) and CpG, which are agonists of toll-like receptors TLR3 and TLR9, respectively, showed protective effects when administered prior to SARS-CoV infection [@doi:10.1128/JVI.01410-12].
Therefore, TLR agonists hold some potential for broad-spectrum prophylaxis.

Given that a large number of clinical trials are currently in progress, more information about the potential of these and other therapeutics should become available over time.
This information, combined with advances in understanding the molecular structure and viral pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, may lead to a more complete understanding of how the virus affects the human host and what strategies can improve outcomes.
To date, investigations of potential therapeutics for COVID-19 have focused primarily on repurposing existing drugs.
This approach is necessary given the urgency of the situation as well as the extensive time required for developing and testing new therapies.
However, in the long-term, new drugs specific for treatment of COVID-19 may also enter development.
Development of novel drugs is likely to be guided by what is known about the pathogenesis and molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2.
For example, understanding the various structural components of SARS-CoV-2 may allow for the development of small molecule inhibitors of those components.
Currently, crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease have recently been resolved [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882; @url:https://www.diamond.ac.uk/covid-19/for-scientists/Main-protease-structure-and-XChem.html], and efforts are already in place to perform screens for small molecule inhibitors of the main protease, which have yielded potential hits [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882].
Much work remains to be done to determine further crystal structures of other viral components, understand the relative utility of targeting different viral components, perform additional small molecule inhibitor screens, and determine the safety and efficacy of the potential inhibitors.
While still nascent, work in this area is promising.
Over the longer term, this approach and others may lead to the development of novel therapeutics specifically for COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2.

### Social Factors Influencing COVID-19 Outcomes

In addition to understanding the fundamental biology of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and COVID-19, it is critical to consider how the broader environment can influence both COVID-19 outcomes and efforts to develop and implement treatments for the disease.
The evidence clearly indicates that social environmental factors are critical determinants of individuals' and communities' risks related to COVID-19.
There are distinct components to COVID-19 susceptibility, and an individual's risk can be elevated at one or all stages from exposure to recovery/mortality: an individual may be more likely to be exposed to the virus, more likely to get infected once exposed, more likely to have serious complications once infected, and be less likely to receive adequate care once they are seriously ill.
The fact that differences in survival between Black and white patients were no longer significant after controlling for comorbidities and socioeconomic status (type of insurance, neighborhood deprivation score, and hospital where treatment was received) in addition to sex and age [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.18039] underscores the relevance of social factors to understanding mortality differences between racial and ethnic groups.
Moreover, the Black patients were younger and more likely to be female than white patients, yet still had a higher mortality rate without correction for the other variables [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.18039].
Here, we outline a few systemic reasons that may exacerbate the COVID-19 pandemic in communities of color.

#### Exposure to COVID-19

Social distancing has emerged as one of the main social policies used to manage the COVID-19 epidemic in many countries.
Many governments issued stay-at-home orders, especially in the initial months of the crisis.
However, data clearly indicates that these orders impacted different socioeconomic groups differently.
In U.S. counties with and without stay-at-home orders, smartphone tracking indicated a significant decrease in the general population's mobility in April relative to February through March of 2020 (-52.3% and -60.8%, respectively) [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.03.20084624].
A linear relationship was observed between counties' reduction in mobility and their wealth and health, as measured by access to health care, food security, income, space, and other factors [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.03.20084624].
Counties with greater reductions in mobility were also found to have much lower child poverty and household crowding and to be more racially segregated, and to have fewer youth and more elderly residents [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.03.20084624].
Similar associations between wealth and decreased mobility were observed in cellphone GPS data from Colombia, Indonesia, and Mexico collected between January and May 2020 [@arXiv:2006.15195].
These disparities in mobility are likely to be related to the role that essential workers have played during the pandemic.
Essential workers are disproportionately likely to be female, people of color, immigrants, and to have an income below 200% of the poverty line [@url:https://mronline.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/2020-04-Frontline-Workers.pdf].
Black Americans in particular are over-represented among front-line workers and in professions where social distancing is infeasible [@doi:10.1002/ajim.23145].
Health care work in particular presents an increased risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1002/ajim.23145; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0232452; @url:https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/causesofdeath/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19relateddeathsbyoccupationenglandandwales/deathsregistereduptoandincluding20april2020; @url:https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/whichoccupationshavethehighestpotentialexposuretothecoronaviruscovid19/2020-05-11; @url:https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/disparities_review.pdf].
In the United Kingdom, (South) Asians are more likely than their white counterparts to be medical professionals [@url:https://www.ifs.org.uk/inequality/chapter/are-some-ethnic-groups-more-vulnerable-to-covid-19-than-others/], although BAME medical professionals are still disproportionately represented in the proportion of National Health Service staff deaths [@url:https://www.hsj.co.uk/exclusive-deaths-of-nhs-staff-from-covid-19-analysed/7027471.article].
Similar trends have been reported for nurses, especially nurses of color, in the United States [@url:https://act.nationalnursesunited.org/page/-/files/graphics/0920_Covid19_SinsOfOmission_Data_Report.pdf].
Furthermore, beyond the risks associated with work itself, use of public transportation may also impact COVID-19 risk [@url:http://www.nber.org/papers/w27407].
The socioeconomic and racial/ethnic gaps in who is working on the front lines of the pandemic make it clear that socioeconomic privilege is likely to decrease the probability of exposure to SARS-CoV-2.

Increased risk of exposure can also arise outside the workplace.
Nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities received attention early on as high-risk locations for COVID-19 outbreaks [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.11642].
Prisons and detention centers also confer a high risk of exposure or infection [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528].
Populations in care facilities are largely older adults, and in the United States, incarcerated people are more likely to be male and persons of color, especially Black [@url:https://www.issuelab.org/resources/695/695.pdf].
Additionally, multi-generational households are less common among non-Hispanic white Americans than people of other racial and ethnic backgrounds [@doi:10.1111/j.1751-9020.2010.00306.x], increasing the risk of exposure for more susceptible family members.
Analysis suggests that household crowding may also be associated with increased risk of COVID-19 exposure [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.03.20084624], and household crowding is associated with poverty [@doi:10.1037/12057-014].
Forms of economic insecurity like housing insecurity, which is associated with poverty and more pronounced in communities subjected to racism [@doi:10.7916/D8WH2W9T; @doi:10.1093/socpro/spv025], would be likely to increase household crowding and other possible sources of exposure.
As a result, facets of systemic inequality such as mass incarceration of Black Americans and poverty are likely to increase the risk of exposure outside of the workplace.

#### Severity of COVID-19 Following Exposure

Following exposure to SARS-CoV-2, the likelihood that an individual develops COVID-19 and the severity of the disease presentation can be influenced by a number of social factors.
As discussed above, a number of patient characteristics are associated with the likelihood of severe COVID-19 symptoms.
In some cases, these trends run counter to those expected given rates of exposure: for example, although women are more likely to be exposed, men are more likely to be diagnosed with, hospitalized from, or die from COVID-19 [@doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570].
In the case of comorbid conditions and racial/ethnic demographics, however, social factors are highly likely to modulate or at least influence the apparent association between these traits and the increased risk from COVID-19.
In particular, the comorbidities and racial/ethnic correlates of severe COVID-19 outcomes suggest that poverty confers additional risk for COVID-19.

In order to explore the relationship between poverty and COVID-19 outcomes, it is necessary to consider how poverty impacts biology.
In particular, we focus on the United States and the United Kingdom.
Comorbidities that increase risk for COVID-19, including obesity, type II diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease, are known to be intercorrelated [@doi:10/bpp37d].
Metabolic conditions related to heightened inflammation, like obesity, type II diabetes, and hypertension, are more strongly associated with negative COVID-19 outcomes than other comorbid conditions, such as chronic heart disease [@doi:10.2337/dbi19-0023].
As discussed above, dysregulated inflammation characteristic of cytokine release syndrome is one of the greatest concerns for COVID-19-related death.
Therefore, it is possible that chronic inflammation characteristic of these metabolic conditions predisposes patients to COVID-19-related death [@doi:10.2337/dbi19-0023].
The association between these diseases and severe COVID-19 outcomes is a concern from a health equity perspective because poverty exposes people to "obesogenic" conditions [@doi:10/gddg84] and is therefore unsurprisingly associated with higher incidence of obesity and associated disorders [@doi:10.5604/12321966.1120608].
Furthermore, cell phone GPS data suggests that lower socioeconomic status may also be associated with decreased access to healthy food choices during the COVID-19 pandemic [@doi:10.1002/oby.22940; @doi:10.1002/oby.22993], suggesting that health-related risk factors for COVID-19 may be exacerbated as the pandemic continues [@doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2020.07.002].
Chronic inflammation is a known outcome of chronic stress (e.g., [@doi:10.1067/mai.2000.110163; @doi:10.1037/0278-6133.21.6.531; @doi:10.1037/a0025536; @doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2006.00450.x]).
Therefore, the chronic stress of poverty is likely to influence health broadly (as summarized in @doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1205-92) and especially during the stress of the ongoing pandemic.

A preprint [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502] provided observational evidence that geographical areas in the United States that suffer from worse air pollution by fine particulate matter have also suffered more COVID-19 deaths per capita, after adjusting for demographic covariates.
Although lack of individual-level exposure data and the impossibility of randomization make it difficult to elucidate the exact causal mechanism, this finding would be consistent with similar findings for all-cause mortality (e.g., [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1803222115]).
Exposure to air pollution is associated with both poverty (e.g., [@doi:10.3390/ijerph15061114]) and chronic inflammation [@doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.06.002].
Other outcomes of environmental racism, such as the proximity of abandoned uranium mines to Navajo land, can also cause respiratory illnesses and other health issues [@url:https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/jisd/article/view/70753/54416].
Similarly, preliminary findings indicate that nutritional status (e.g., vitamin D deficiency [@doi:10.1210/clinem/dgaa733]) may be associated with COVID-19 outcomes, and reduced access to grocery stores and fresh food often co-occurs with environmental racism [@url:https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/jisd/article/view/70753/54416; @doi:10.1056/NEJMp2021264].
Taken together, the evidence suggests that low-income workers who face greater exposure to SARS-CoV-2 due to their home or work conditions are also more likely to face environmental and social stressors associated with increased inflammation, and therefore with increased risk from COVID-19.
In particular, structural racism can play an important role on disease severity after SARS-CoV-2 exposure, due to consequences of racism which include an increased likelihood of poverty and its associated food and housing instability.
COVID-19 can thus be considered a "syndemic", or a synergistic interaction between several epidemics [@doi:10.1002/ajhb.23482].
As a result, it is not surprising that people from minoritized backgrounds and/or with certain pre-existing conditions are more likely to suffer severe effects of COVID-19, but these "risk factors" are likely to be causally linked to poverty.

#### Access to Treatment

Finally, COVID-19 outcomes can be influenced by access to healthcare.
Receiving care for COVID-19 can, but does not always, include receiving a positive test for the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
For example, it is common to see treatment guidelines for suspected cases regardless of whether the presence of SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.03.036]).
Whether and where a patient is diagnosed can depend on their access to testing, which can vary both between and within countries.
In the United States, it is not always clear whether an individual will have access to free testing [@url:https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/06/19/880543755/insurers-may-only-pay-for-coronavirus-tests-when-theyre-medically-necessary; @url:https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2020/private-health-insurance-coverage-covid-19-public-health-emergency].
The concern has been raised that more economic privilege is likely to correspond to increased access to testing, at least within the United States [@doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046].
This is supported by the fact that African Americans seem to be more likely to be diagnosed in the hospital, while individuals from other groups were more likely to have been diagnosed in ambulatory settings in the community [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598].
Any delays in treatment are a cause for concern [@doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046], which could potentially be increased by an inability to acquire testing because in the United States, insurance coverage for care received can depend on a positive test [@url:https://www.hrsa.gov/coviduninsuredclaim/frequently-asked-questions].

Another important question is whether patients with moderate to severe cases are able to access hospital facilities and treatments, to the extent that they have been identified.
Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd], although reported mortality is generally an estimate of CFR, which is dependent on rates of testing.
Efforts to make treatment accessible for all confirmed and suspected cases of COVID-19 in China are credited with expanding care to people with fewer economic resources [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0823-6].
In the United States, access to healthcare varies widely, with certain sectors of the workforce less likely to have health insurance; many essential workers in transportation, food service, and other frontline fields are among those likely to be uninsured or underinsured [@doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046].
As of 2018, Hispanic Americans of all races were much less likely to have health insurance than people from non-Hispanic backgrounds [@url:https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2019/demo/p60-267.pdf].
Therefore, access to diagnostics and care prior to the development of severe COVID-19 is likely to vary depending on socioeconomic and social factors, many of which overlap with the risks of exposure and of developing more severe COVID-19 symptoms.
This discrepancy ties into concerns about broad infrastructural challenges imposed by COVID-19.
A major concern in many countries has been the saturation of healthcare systems due to the volume of COVID-19 hospitalizations (e.g., [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2004064117]).
Similarly, there have been shortages of supplies such as ventilators that are critical to the survival of many COVID-19 patients, leading to extensive ethical discussions about how to allocate limited resources among patients [@doi:10.19044/esj.2020.v16n21p24; @doi:10.7249/PEA228-1; @arxiv:2008.00374; @doi:10.1016/j.surg.2020.04.044].
Although it is generally considered unethical to consider demographic factors such as age, sex, race, or ethnicity while making such decisions, and ideally this information would not be shared with triage teams tasked with allocating limited resources among patients [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137], there are substantial concerns about implicit and explicit biases against older adults [@doi:10.1111/jgs.16539], premature infants [@doi:10.1111/apa.15334], and people with disabilities or comorbidities [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764138; @doi:10.2105/AJPH.2020.305837; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137].
Because of the greater burden of chronic disease in populations subjected to systemic racism, algorithms intended to be blind to race and ethnicity could, in fact, reinforce systemic inequalities caused by structural racism [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1777347; @doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2020.05.010; @doi:10.1056/NEJMp2023616].
Because of this inequality, it has been argued that groups facing health disparities should be prioritized by these algorithms [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
This approach would carry its own ethical concerns, including the fact that many resources that need to be distributed do not have well-established risks and benefits [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

As the pandemic has progressed, it has become clear that ICU beds and ventilators are not the only limited resources that needs to be allocated, and, in fact, the survival rate for patients who receive mechanical ventilation is lower than these discussions would suggest [@doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-106460].
Allocation of interventions that may reduce suffering, including palliative care, has become critically important [@doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-106460; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1788663].
The ambiguities surrounding the risks and benefits associated with therapeutics that have been approved under emergency use authorizations also present ethical concerns related to the distribution of resources [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
For example, remdesivir, discussed below, is an antiviral produced by Gilead that has shown some promise for alleviating symptoms and reducing the duration of hospitalization.
Remdesivir is currently available for the treatment of COVID-19 under compassionate use guidelines and through expanded access programs, and in many cases has been donated to hospitals by Gilead [@doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.016; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Regulations guiding the distribution of drugs in situations like these typically do not address how to determine which patients receive them [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would also be unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic that may or not be beneficial [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
On the other hand, given that the drug is one of the most promising treatments available for many patients, using a framework that tacitly feeds into structural biases would also be unethical.
At present, the report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethics Subcommittee of the CDC fails to address the complexity of this ethical question given the state of structural racism in the United States, instead stating that "prioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].
In many cases, experimental therapeutics are made available only through participation in clinical trials [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795541].
However, given the history of medical trials abusing minority communities, especially Black Americans, there is a history of unequal representation in clinical trial enrollment [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795541].
As a result, the standard practice of requiring enrollment in a clinical trial in order to receive experimental treatment may also reinforce patterns established by systemic racism.
<!--Risk of comorbid health conditions associated with more severe outcomes may be influenced by long-term damage caused by chronic stress related to traumatic social experiences [@doi:10.1007/s12170-013-0338-5], perhaps mediated by cardiovascular risk factors [@doi:10.1101/2020.05.10.20097253], although the effects of chronic stress have not yet been researched in the specific case of COVID-19 disparities.-->

#### Access to and Representation in Clinical Trials

<!-- Add #600 here -->

<!--Table for future version: ### Indirect Effects of the Pandemic
Besides the direct harms caused by infection, many populations are in indirect risk of serious harm due to the social and economic effects of the pandemic and of the efforts needed to fight it.
These might include individuals with substance use disorder [@doi:10.7326/M20-1141], victims of natural disasters [@doi:10.1038/s41558-020-0804-2], and victims of human trafficking [@doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100409].
The pandemic could also delay the fight against other major infectious diseases, such as HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, potentially leading to a further increase of mortality [@doi:10.25561/78670].
Although they are beyond the scope of this paper, further research is needed in order to prevent these harms. <!-- there are already some policy recommendations in literature that we cite - we should probably direct folks there. I think we probably want a stronger synthesis and closing than this -->
-->

### Conclusions and Future Directions

As the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, the scientific community's response will be critical for identifying potential pharmacological and biotechnological developments that may aid in combating the virus and the disease it causes.
However, this global crisis highlights the importance of mounting a response based on collaboration among a wide variety of disciplines.
Understanding the basic science of the virus and its pathogenesis is imperative for identifying and envisioning possible diagnostic and therapeutic approaches; understanding how social factors can influence outcomes and shape implementation of a response is critical to disseminating any scientific advancements.
Summarizing such a complex and ever-changing topic presents a number of challenges.
This review represents the effort of over 50 contributors <!-- TO DO: check with final number -->to distill and interpret the available information.
However, this text represents a dynamic and evolving document, and we welcome continued contributions from all researchers who have insights into how these topics intersect.
A multidisciplinary perspective is critical to understanding this evolving crisis, and in this review we seek to use open science tools to coordinate a response among a variety of researchers.
We intend to publish additional updates as the situation evolves.
